
     User's Manual for the ARJ/ARJ32 archiver program,        October 2000



        ARJ/ARJ32 software and manual are copyright (c) 1990-2000 by ARJ 
        Software, Inc. All rights reserved.



     ** IMPORTANT NEWS ****************************************************

        Users of ARJ should read the WHATSNEW.TXT and UPDATE.TXT files
        that contain information about the latest improvements to ARJ.

        For ARJ32 users, please refer to the UPDATE32.TXT for the 
        differences from ARJ.

     **********************************************************************



     TOPICS COVERED IN THIS DOCUMENT
     -------------------------------

     DEDICATION
     INTRODUCTION
     NEW USERS
     TERMINOLOGY
     MAJOR FEATURES OF ARJ
     ARCHIVER BENCHMARKS
     RELEASE NOTES
     YEAR 2000 COMPLIANCE STATEMENT
     WINZIP COMPATIBILITY
     TECHNICAL NOTES
     DEARJ AND REARJ PROGRAMS
     SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS
     INSTALLATION
     REGISTER STAMPING ARJ
     QUICK START TO USING ARJ
     HOW TO CREATE AN EXECUTABLE SELF-EXTRACTING ARJ ARCHIVE
     HOW TO CUSTOMIZE AN EXECUTABLE SELF-EXTRACTING ARJ ARCHIVE
     CONVERTING OTHER ARCHIVE FILES TO ARJ FORMAT
     HOW TO USE ARJ
     ARJ LIMITATIONS
     IMPORTANT NOTES
     TIPS TO USING ARJ EFFICIENTLY
     USING ARJ WITHIN OTHER PROGRAMS
     ARJMENU PROGRAM
     USING ARJ AS A BACKUP PROGRAM
     BACKUP TYPE ARCHIVES AND BACKUP FILES
     CHAPTER ARCHIVES
     WINDOWS 95 LONG FILENAME SUPPORT
     ARJ-PROTECT DATA PROTECTION FEATURE
     ARJ ANSI COMMENT HANDLING
     THE FILESPEC "..."
     ARJ ERROR SITUATIONS
     ARJ DOS ERRORLEVELS
     ARJ USER ACTION PROMPTS
     ARJ ENVIRONMENT VARIABLE/CONFIGURATION FILE
     ARJ COMMAND LINE SYNTAX
     ARJ RESPONSE FILE SYNTAX
     ARCHIVE NAME WILDCARDING
     ARJ COMMANDS
     ARJ SWITCH OPTIONS
     ARJ COMMAND OPTIONS
     SAMPLE ARJ COMMANDS
     ARJ_SECURITY ENVELOPE
     KNOWN ARJ ISSUES/PROBLEMS
     ARJ ERROR MESSAGES
     COMMONLY ASKED QUESTIONS
     ARJ TECHNICAL SUPPORT
     ARJ AVAILABILITY
     ARJ INTERNET MAILING LIST
     ARJ WEB SUPPORT
     SDN EXTENSION FILES
     DISTRIBUTORS
     ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
     USAGE AND DISTRIBUTION POLICY
     BRIEF BIOGRAPHY OF ARJ AUTHOR
     FINAL COMMENTS



     DEDICATION:

        The ARJ program is dedicated to God and to my family.  From the
        beginning, our family decided that God would be the senior partner
        in our company and that our business practices would strive to
        reflect the principles that He has so graciously provided to the
        world in His Word.


     INTRODUCTION:

        ARJ is the result of a desire to use my interest in compression
        technology to produce an archiver for personal use on PCs and on
        minicomputers that provides power and excellent flexibility.

        This document is designed as an ARJ program reference manual and
        is not appropriate for novices to ARJ.  The file named INTRO.TXT
        is intended for novices.

        Please note that the shareware versions of the ARJ programs may be
        slightly limited in functionality.  See the UPDATE.TXT for more
        information.


     NEW USERS:

        Users new to the ARJ archiver should start reading the INTRO.TXT
        file instead of this document file.


     TERMINOLOGY:

        The following terms are used through this manual.

        ARCHIVE - This is a file containing one or more files in a
        compressed or non-compressed state and containing file related
        information such as filename and date-time last modified, etc.

        ARJ32 - Windows 32 bit console mode version of ARJ.  ARJ32 supports
        the Win32 environment of Windows 95/98/NT/2000.
        
        ARJ FILE - This is an archive created by ARJ.

        BACKUP TYPE ARCHIVE - This is an ARJ archive that has the internal
        backup flag turned on.  This feature is obsolete after ARJ version
        2.50a.  Current and future versions of ARJ will ignore the special
        flag set on file backups.  Replacing this backup archive scheme is
        the chapter archive scheme.

        CHAPTER ARCHIVE - This is an ARJ archive that contains one or more
        backup chapters.  A chapter archive stores a full backup and a
        series of incremental backups in a manner that saves disk space by
        not storing duplicate files.  A chapter archive allows the user to
        recover a directory of files as they were when the backup chapter
        was made.  In other words, if daily backup chapters of a source
        directory were made from Monday to Friday, one could recover the
        source directory as it was on Wednesday.

        COMPRESSION - The process of encoding redundant information into
        data requiring less storage space.

        COMPRESSION PERCENTAGE/RATIO - The percentage compression reported
        by ARJ is a variation of one of the TWO standard methods of
        expressing compression ratio in the technical literature.  ARJ uses
        the compressed size / original size ratio.  The other method is the
        inverse ratio.  When ARJ reports 96% as the compression ratio, which
        means that the compressed file is 96 percent of the original size
        (very little compression).  Other archivers use their own methods.
        LHARC uses the same ratio as ARJ.

        EXTRACTION or UNCOMPRESSION - The processing of recreating the
        exact information that was previously compressed.

        SELF-EXTRACTION MODULE (SFX) - This is an archive that is an
        executable file that is capable of extracting self-contained files.

        TEXT MODE - In text mode, ARJ inputs the file using the C library
        text mode which translates the carriage return, linefeed control
        characters of MS-DOS to a single linefeed character.  This saves
        space and provides the option for cross platform file extraction.
        On another platform, the host C library would change the single
        linefeed to the host text newline separator sequence.  In addition,
        for platforms such as PRIMOS which set bit 8 in ASCII text
        characters, ARJ sets/resets bit 8 according to the platform
        extracted to.  When extracting a text mode file to the same type
        of platform archived from, ARJ will NOT strip the 8-bit text to
        7-bit text.

        VOLUMES - These are ARJ archives that are in sequence and have been
        created by a single ARJ command.  Files in the volumes may span
        volumes in a split format.  These volumes are usable archives.

        WINDOWS 9x - All versions of Windows 95 and Windows 98.

        WINDOWS 2K - Windows 2000

        WINNT - Windows NT


     MAJOR FEATURES OF ARJ:

        Currently provides excellent compression in terms of size reduction
        compared to the leading archivers including PKZIP 1.10, PKZIP 2.04,
        LHARC 1.13c, and LHA 2.13.
        
        ARJ is particularly effective with database files and documents.

        The ability to process and archive up to 65,000 files at one time.

        The ability to select files for archival by type and/or attribute.

        Support for Windows 9x long filenames in the Windows 9x GUI DOS
        environment.  ARJ32 also supports long filenames in Windows NT/2K.

        The ability to repair small amounts of archive damage (headers and 
        file data) of an ARJ-PROTECTED archive.
        
        Archive and individual file comments with the option of inputting
        comments from a file.

        ARJ has MS-DOS 3.x international language support for the proper
        casing of filenames and text.

        The ability to put the entire ARJ command line in a response type
        file as in "ARJ @command.rsp".

        32 bit CRC file integrity check.

        DOS volume label support.

        Default storing of specified pathnames to allow recovery of a
        directory structure.

        Empty directory support.

        Backup support in the chapter archive scheme which allows a series
        of backups to be included in a single archive so that one can
        recover any one of the backups.  The advantage of chapters is that
        files that have not changed are saved only once in the archive.

        Test new archive before overwriting the original archive option.

        Archives that can span diskettes.  This allows the user to backup a
        full hard disk drive to multiple floppies.  Recovery of individual
        files is convenient because each diskette archive is an individual
        archive except for the split file portion.  No need to use SLICE
        with ARJ.  In addition, ARJ in disk spanning mode can support the
        use of 3.5 HD diskettes formatted at higher capacities than 1.44
        MBytes.  Moreover, ARJ can build these disk spanning archives on
        the hard disk drive for later transfer to diskettes.

        Archive file re-ordering facility with the option of sorting by
        file size, file extension, CRC value, date-time modified, filename,
        pathname, compression ratio, file attribute and more.

        String searching with context display within archive files.

        Built-in facility to recover files from broken archives.

        Self-extraction feature that is internal to the ARJ runfile.  The
        SFX module is full-featured with a built-in help screen.  ARJ also
        includes a smaller SFXJR module with fewer features.

        Multiple volume self-extracting archives.

        The ability to embed command line type options inside
        self-extracting archives and to execute a command after extraction.

        Internal string data integrity check in ARJ to resist hacking a la
        LHARC to ICE.

        Archive security envelope "seal" feature to resist tampering with
        secured archives.  This feature disallows ANY changes to a secured
        archive. Even the archive comments can NOT be changed without
        removing the "seal".

        Password option to encrypt archived files.

        Text mode data compression option to enable movement of text files
        from one host machine to another.  Text mode also results in
        slightly greater file size reduction on MS-DOS machines.

        File extraction to screen in a paged mode to permit browsing
        through an archive.

        Specification of the files to be added to or exclude from an
        archive via one or more list files.  In addition, ARJ can generate
        a list file.

        Specification of files to be excluded from processing by ARJ.

        Sub-directory recursion during compression and extraction.


     ARCHIVER BENCHMARKING:

        This is information for those who plan to publish benchmark test
        results comparing ARJ with other file archivers.

        The ARJ "-jm" compression is intended to demonstrate the best that
        ARJ can do in terms of size reduction.  However, the ARJ "-jm1"
        compression is almost as good in terms of size reduction.  The ARJ
        "-m2" compression is intended to compete with LHA 2.12.  The ARJ 
        "-m3" compression is intended to compete with PKZIP 1.10.

        The ARJ "-e" option is necessary during size benchmarks because 
        ARJ by default stores the entire specified pathname in the archive 
        as opposed to other archivers which strip path specifications.

        Example command:  ARJ a benchmrk -e -jm1 files\*.*

        The very size of the ARJ runfile adds significantly to the
        compression and extraction times when testing smaller archives.


     RELEASE NOTES:

        The use of ARJ/ARJ32 in a business, commercial, institutional, or
        government environment requires a license.  However, business,
        commercial, institutional and government users may use ARJ for
        evaluation purposes for a period of 30 days.  See the LICENSE.TXT
        for full details.  A government agency may NOT require others to
        use ARJ without obtaining a license.

        The inclusion of any of the ARJ software (ARJ, ARJ32, DEARJ,
        ARJSFX, ARJSFXV, ARJSFXJR, ARJSFX32, REARJ, REARJ32) with software
        and/or hardware for distribution requires a license.  There is an
        exception for freeware/shareware software collections.  See the
        file LICENSE.TXT for details.

        While evaluating ARJ, you should use the "-jt" (test archive)
        option to verify new ARJ archives of your data.

        This version has been tested under DOS 2.11, 3.3, 4.01, 5.0, 6.0,
        and 6.2x.  It also runs under the DOS windows of Windows 3.x,
        Windows 95/98, OS/2 2.0, Warp 3, and Warp 4.

        ARJ32 has been tested under Windows NT 4.0 service pack 3, Windows
        95, Windows 98, and Windows 2000.

        Here is a suggested command that will test ARJ on all of your files:

        ARJ a testvol c:\ -v360dtestvol.* -xtestvol.* -y -jf -jt1 -r


     YEAR 2000 COMPLIANCE STATEMENT:

        See the file YEAR2000.TXT.

        This version of ARJ has been modified to allow the specification
        of the century for the ARJ date options "-o" and "-ob".  Prior to
        this version, the ARJ date options would accept a date in the form
        of YYMMDD.  With this version, ARJ will accept dates in both
        YYMMDD and YYYYMMDD formats.  ARJ will presume that any year
        specifications beginning with 19, 20, and 21 are YYYY type
        specifications and any year specifications beginning with 80, 81,
        82 .... 99, 00, 01 .... 18 are YY type specifications.

        Example:  -o980105         -> on or after Jan 5, 1998
                  -o19980105       -> on or after Jan 5, 1998
                  -o100105         -> on or after Jan 5, 2010
                  -o20100105       -> on or after Jan 5, 2010
                  -o201001051200   -> on or after Jan 5, 2010 12:00 P.M.
                  -o100105         -> on or after Jan 5, 2010 12:00 A.M.


     WINZIP COMPATIBILITY:

        Winzip 7.0 has compatibility issues with the copyright header of
        ARJ 2.70 and 2.71.  With this release, the header was modified to
        allow compatibility with Winzip 7.0.  Winzip 8.0 does NOT have this
        compatibility issue with ARJ 2.70 and 2.71.

        ARJ32.EXE is not supported by Winzip at this time.  However, if you
        rename ARJ32.EXE to ARJ.EXE, Winzip will support it.


     TECHNICAL NOTES:

        A detailed technical description of the ARJ archive format is
        available in the UNARJ distribution archive.  This archive
        contains a description of the archive header formats as well as C
        source code for an ARJ archive extractor and lister program.  This
        UNARJ source code has been made portable to several platforms 
        including UNIX, NEXT, DOS, and AMIGA.  However, we only distribute
        and support the PC versions.


     DEARJ and REARJ PROGRAMS:

        DEARJ is the ARJ program without the archive creation/modification 
        functions, the "w" command, the self-extractors, and the "-jt1" 
        and "-jt2" switches.

        The UNREGISTERED version of DEARJ CANNOT handle multiple volume
        archives.  

        DEARJ is normally not needed because ARJ now has a multiple volume 
        self-extractor which provides the same functions.

        Registration of REARJ will enable a number of additional 
        enhancements including environment variable usage, !listfile 
        capability and selection by file date-time.

        See the LICENSE.TXT and ORDERFRM.TXT for more information.

        ARJR is no longer available.

        UNARJ and DEARJ are NOT the same program.

        ARJ32 does not have a DEARJ32.EXE.


     SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS:

        The ARJ software package is designed to work under DOS versions and
        DOS boxes from 2.11 and above.  However, certain features have an
        OS limitation under DOS versions prior to DOS 3.0: access to the
        self-extractors and to the built-in help information.  To get the
        ARJ help screens and the ARJ self-extraction creation to work,
        ARJ.EXE MUST be located in the CURRENT directory.  This limitation
        exist only in newer versions of ARJ to save on memory usage.

        Within the Windows 9x DOS box environment, ARJ supports the use of
        Windows 9x long filenames.  This feature ONLY works in the Windows
        9x DOS box.  It does not work under DOS 6.x nor does it work under
        Windows NT/2000.

        ARJ32 runs only under Windows 95/98/NT/2K graphical environment.


     INSTALLATION:

        We assume that you have a copy of the self-extracting ARJ module
        named ARJ###.EXE where "###" represents the ARJ version number.
        Typing ARJ### [RETURN] at the DOS command prompt will initiate the
        self-extraction feature.  ARJ### will by default extract its files
        to the "C:\ARJ" directory.  When ARJ### starts, you will see 
        several lines of text describing ARJ and then a line asking if you 
        wish to continue extraction.  Entering "yes" or "y" will continue 
        the extraction.  If there are any duplicate filenames in the 
        destination directory, the program will prompt you for 
        overwriting. You can enter "yes", "no", or "quit".

        To complete the installation, you will need to add the destination
        directory ("C:\ARJ" is the default) to the PATH statement in your
        AUTOEXEC.BAT file.  For Windows 95/98, you should add the statement
        
        set path=%path%;c:\arj

        to the end of the AUTOEXEC.BAT file.  Do NOT insert any spaces for 
        added clarity.

        ARJCRYPT.COM is an ARJ accessory encryption module for USA users 
        only.  It is available on the ARJ website.
        
        ARJ32_C.DLL is an ARJ32 accessory encryption module for USA users 
        only.  It is available on the ARJ website.

        You may, of course, prefer to use ARJ 1.00 or higher to extract
        the contents of ARJ###.EXE file manually.

        Example:  ARJ e ARJ###.EXE C:\ARJ\


     REGISTER STAMPING ARJ:

        *** REMINDER: ARJ 2.7x uses a new registration scheme which 
        *** obsoletes all previous registration keys.
        
        If, when you purchase an ARJ license, you choose to receive your 
        ARJ key by email, you will need to put the emailed key data into a 
        file named REGISTER.DAT in the same directory as the ARJ software 
        programs.  Then you need to execute REGISTER.EXE with either the 
        -ARJ option or the -ARJ32 option depending upon your software.  
        Please note that the registration key for ARJ does not work with 
        ARJ32 and vice-versa. 

        A more detailed explanation can be found in the file REGISTER.TXT.


     QUICK START TO USING ARJ:

        See the document INTRO.TXT.


     HOW TO CREATE AN EXECUTABLE SELF-EXTRACTING ARJ ARCHIVE:

        The command "ARJ y -je archive" will create a full featured
        self-extracting archive from an already built archive.

        The command "ARJ y -je1 archive" will create a smaller
        self-extracting archive.

        Syntax:  ARJ y -je archive      produces archive.exe

        ARJ lets users create multiple volume self-extracting archives.

        Syntax:  ARJ y -je archive -v360K     produces archive.exe,
                                              archive.e01, archive.e02 ....

        An alternative mode (-ve option) lets you create a multiple volume 
        self-extracting archive where the volumes all end in .EXE.  Only
        the first volume is the extractor module.  The other volumes end 
        in .EXE for use on an Internet download website.  Netscape and 
        Explorer will properly download .EXE files.

        Syntax:  ARJ y -je archive -ve360K    produces archive.exe,
                                              arch001.exe, arch002.exe ....

        Under DOS systems other than 2.11, 3.2, 3.3, 4.0, 5.0, 6.x, and
        7.0, you may have to rename the self-extract module to ARJSFX.EXE
        to do the extraction.

        See the file SFX.TXT for more information.


     HOW TO CUSTOMIZE AN EXECUTABLE SELF-EXTRACTING ARJ ARCHIVE:

        It is possible to customize an ARJ self-extracting archive to
        execute command line options as if the user typed in the options.

        Upon execution, an ARJ self-extractor checks its DOS command line
        for any options that the user might have entered (ARJSFX -t).  If
        the self-extractor does not find any options, it will look for the 
        self-extractor archive comment.  If the first line of the comment
        begins with two right parentheses, the self-extractor will execute
        any command options following the two right parentheses.

        See the file SFX.TXT for more information.


     CONVERTING OTHER ARCHIVE FILES TO ARJ FORMAT:

        Included with this software is the program REARJ.  This program can
        be used to individually or collectively convert archive files from
        other formats to the ARJ format.

        The command "REARJ *.ZIP *.ARC *.LZH" will convert all ZIP, ARC,
        and LZH archives in the current directory to the ARJ format.  See
        the REARJ.TXT for more information about REARJ.


     HOW TO USE ARJ:

        If you type ARJ [return], you will see a simple help screen.

        If you type ARJ -? [return], you will see more detailed help
        information.


     ARJ LIMITATIONS:

        ARJ will accept up to:    64 filenames/wildnames on command line
                               65000 filenames resulting from wildnames
                               16000 filenames/wildnames to exclude
                               16000 filenames to sort
                               16000 ARJ filenames resulting from wildnames
                                2048 character comments
                                     (up to 25 lines or 1 file)
        
        For compressing, ARJ requires approximately 300,000 bytes plus the
        memory necessary to store all of the pathnames to be archived when
        using the default compression method (-m1).

        For extracting, ARJ requires approximately 175,000 bytes plus.
        The program DEARJ requires approximately 125,000 bytes plus.

        There is no limitation on the number of files that can be stored in
        one archive.  However, when archiving a large number of files, ARJ
        will use additional disk space to manage its internal list of those
        filenames.

        Example:

           ARJ a -r archive \*.* -hm

        ARJ currently does not see that wildnames like "C:*.*" and "C:\*.*"
        can actually represent the same thing.  ARJ would expand each of
        those two wildnames into a list that could be up to twice as long
        as necessary.

        When updating an archive, ARJ creates a temporary file named
        ARJTEMP.$nn in the current directory or special work directory if
        specified (-hm!F:\).

        While ARJ is scanning a wildcard filespec, ARJ will change the name
        of the target archive to ARJTEMP.$nn while the scan is proceeding
        to avoid including the archive itself in an add or move command.
        Also, as a result, you cannot add a file named ARJTEMP.$nn to an
        ARJ archive.  Please note that the name of this temporary file may
        change at a future revision of ARJ.

        In this release, ARJ will not use memory for filenames that it does
        not select by name or by file attribute (archive bit, file type).


     IMPORTANT NOTES:

        When using the "-w" working directory switch, ARJ does not check 
        on space availability before overwriting the original archive if 
        it exists.  Be sure that you have enough disk space for the new
        archive before using the "-w" switch.  If ARJ aborts in this
        situation because of disk space, ARJ will keep the temporary
        archive.

        By default, ARJ does not see hidden or system files.  ARJ will
        process system and hidden files when you either specify the "-a"
        switch or use the new "-hb" switch.

        Like LHARC and PKZIP, ARJ requires extra disk space to UPDATE an
        archive file.  ARJ will backup the original archive while it
        creates the new archive, so enough room must be available for both
        archives at the same time.

        Unlike PKZIP, ARJ does not require additional work space when
        CREATING a new archive.

        Currently, ARJ will not extract overwriting a readonly file unless
        the "-ha" option is specified.


     TIPS TO USING ARJ EFFICIENTLY:

        You should use a software or hardware disk cache to speed up ARJ
        access.  Diskette drives should NOT be write-delay enabled.
        Write-delay would prevent ARJ from truly verifying diskette 
        writes.

        When archiving to diskettes, you should use the "-w" option to set
        a working directory on your RAMDRIVE or hard disk drive to speed
        up building the archive.

        You should use the "-jt" or "-jt1" option when archiving to
        diskettes or when you really want to be sure that ARJ will be able
        to extract what you have archived.  There are cases where your
        hardware or memory resident software will corrupt your work, so 
        the "-jt" options are excellent insurance.  If you have bad 
        sectors on your diskettes and verify is turned off, DOS will not 
        tell you about diskette errors until it is too late.  These errors 
        are NOT RECOVERABLE.

        In the news are reports that many floppy disk drives are capable
        of corrupting data on a random basis especially when the computer 
        is busy with many tasks at once.  It is said that this problem is
        due to faulty floppy drive chip design.  We recommend that no 
        other disk intensive tasks be run while using the diskette drive.
        
        Using the "-js" option saves time by not compressing archives of
        PKZIP, LHA, ARC, ZOO, ARJ, etc.

        You should use the "-e" option whenever you do not need to store
        pathnames in an archive that you are creating.  This will save
        space.

        Convert an ARJ archive into a self-extracting archive with a
        command like the following:  ARJ y archive -je

        To capture a comment from an ARJ archive, use the following
        command:  ARJ e archive ... -zcomment.txt  (the "..." is
        significant).

        ARJ has several compression methods that provide size/time
        tradeoffs.  Method 4 "-m4" is about twice as fast as method 1.  The
        "-jm1" and "-jm" options modify the "-m1" option to provide even
        greater compression at a cost in time.


     USING ARJ WITHIN OTHER PROGRAMS:

        Since ARJ uses over 300,000 bytes of memory during compression, it
        is difficult to use ARJ in a large application program unless that
        program swaps itself out of memory when it executes DOS commands
        like ARJ.  However, there is at least one shareware program
        available that will automatically swap your large application
        program out of memory whenever it shells out to DOS to execute a
        command.  The program SHROOM by Davis Augustine should be able to
        solve this memory problem for you.  The latest version as of
        03/11/92 is named SHROM19C.ZIP on Channel One BBS. 

        This is not an endorsement of the product SHROOM.

        The easiest way we have found to use this product is to type:
        SHROOM COMMAND.COM

        SHROOM -v COMMAND.COM will let you see SHROOM in action when you
        shell out to execute a DOS command.

        ARJ32 does not have this memory limitation.


     ARJ HELP HYPERTEXT PROGRAM:

        ARJ-Help is an electronic book (brand named Window Book (TM)) that
        allows the user to discover easily how to use ARJ.  It runs under
        DOS.  It is very fast and has a rich set of features which include
        full-text search, hypertext links, a table of contents that can be
        reorganized to your needs, a complete index, and much more. The
        current version can be found on some BBSes as ARJHLP24.EXE.

            Window Book, Inc.
            P.O. Box 390697
            Cambridge MA 02139
            USA

            TEL:   617-661-9515 or 800-524-0380.
            FAX:   617-354-3961

     
     ARCHIVER UTILITIES THAT SUPPORT THE ARJ FORMAT:

        The following are some other utilities that facilitate the use of
        ARJ.  This list is not all inclusive nor is it meant as a personal
        recommendation.

        ARCHIVE MANAGER PRO - Archiver shell
        ARJMENU 1.x         - ARJ shell
        SHEZ                - Archiver shell
        ARCMASTER           - Archiver shell
        ZGEN                - Archiver shell
        ACZAR               - Archiver shell
        ARJVIEW             - ARJ shell
        AVIEW               - BBS archive viewer
        WINZIP              - Windows archiver shell
        
        WINDOWS COMMANDER   - Windows archiver shell, file manager
        ARJ Folder          - Windows Explorer Shell Extension

        A particularly useful ARJ support utility is SARJ (latest version
        is 1.12) by Frederic Taes.  It improves upon ARJ compression by
        using ARJ to build "solid" archives.

        Windows interface recommendation:
        
        The author of ARJ personally uses both Windows Commander and ARJ 
        Folder for his Windows work with ARJ currently.  Windows Commander
        is especially useful because it supports many popular archivers and
        is designed as a file management tool.  It treats archives like
        directories.  This is especially handy for ARJ users who archive 
        whole directory trees.  And since it is a file manager, one can 
        delete, move, copy, view, edit, and modify files in archives and
        not in archives.  It even has FTP file transfer support.  

        You can find Windows Commander at http://www.ghisler.com


     USING ARJ AS A BACKUP PROGRAM:

        ARJ can be used as a substitute for a backup program.  Now ARJ
        includes an error recovery option (-hk) to help protect against
        many kinds of data errors.  Please note this option must be
        applied before data errors occur.  It is STRONGLY recommended
        that you use the "-hk" option when archiving important files and
        when archiving to diskettes.

        The most common cause of failure is bad diskettes.  You should let
        ARJ test the archives ON the diskettes.  Testing the archives
        before copying them to diskettes is not enough.  Critical data
        should always be backed up two or more times.  Please keep in mind
        that damage to compressed data is many times more serious than
        damage to uncompressed data.

        WARNING:  It is our recommendation that you should NOT update
        multiple volume ARJ archives of critical data especially backup
        archives.  A system error could cause the current set of volumes
        being updated to be damaged.  Use a separate set of diskettes to do
        an incremental backup.

        The following partial command lines illustrate a full backup
        command, an incremental backup command, and a restore command.  The
        only parts missing are the names of the files to backup/restore.

        ARJ a A:backup -r -vvas -a1 -b2 -hk -js -jt -jiC:\backup.inx -wC:\ -m3

        ARJ a A:backup -r -vvas -a1 -b1 -hk -js -jt -jiC:\backup.inx -wC:\ -m3

        ARJ x A:backup -vv -y

        You should familiarize yourself with the above switches so that you
        can modify the above command lines as needed.

        If you have a RAMDRIVE large enough, you should change the "-w"
        option to point to the RAMDRIVE.

        If you have enough free hard disk space, you can build all of the
        diskette volumes on the hard disk for future transfer to diskette.
        In this case, you will need to change the name of the archive to
        "C:backup" or similar.  The "-vvas" option should be changed to
        "-v360", "-v720" or whatever is appropriate for your diskette size.
        Please note that 360, 720, 1200, and 1440 are abbreviations for the
        standard diskette sizes.  Other sizes will require your entering
        the entire number.  Another change is to add the option "-y" which
        will turn off the "Ok to proceed ...." prompt.  Lastly, if the "-w"
        option is pointing to the hard disk, you should remove the "-w"
        option entirely.

        ARJ a C:backup -r -v360  <other options>   -m3 -y

        At this release, ARJ will automatically roll-over the file 
        extension from .A99 to .100 and so on.

        Both backup commands will pause for a "system command".  You can
        execute DOS commands at this point.  This is a suitable place to do
        a "dir a:" to make sure that your disk is formatted and has enough
        free space on it.  You may need to execute "format a:" or "del
        a:\".  A very useful command might be "QDR A:".  QDR is a utility
        from Vernon Buerg.  You will need to type "exit" to allow ARJ to
        continue.

        If the backup fails after completing one or more diskettes, you 
        can restart at the next archive after the last successful volume
        if you have specified an INDEX file with the "-ji" option during 
        the backup.  You can restart by retyping the EXACT SAME command 
        line as before and adding the "-jn" option.  This will cause ARJ 
        to scan the previously written index file for the proper restart 
        information. ARJ will automatically set the correct volume name.

        Example:  ARJ a a:backup c:\ -r -vvas -jiINDEX.FIL
                  ARJ a a:backup c:\ -r -vvas -jiINDEX.FIL -jn

        If a RESTORE operation fails after one or more diskettes, simply 
        retype the same command as before but add the right ".Ann" suffix 
        to the archive name.  If ARJ has aborted because of a disk full on 
        a file split between volumes, you will have to restart at the 
        first volume that contains that file.


     BACKUP TYPE ARCHIVES AND BACKUP FILES:

        This type of archive is obsolete after ARJ version 2.50a.  It is
        replaced by the chapter archive.


     CHAPTER ARCHIVES:

        This feature is useful when backing up frequently modified files.
        This new feature is designed to make the backup management of a
        directory or application easier.  It allows the taking of a
        sequence of backup "snapshots" of a changing application or
        directory.  A chapter archive can provide major space savings over
        using many separate archives for backup.

        For example, a chapter archive could be used to keep track of the
        state of a Windows 3.1 directory.  An initial chapter backup could
        be made of the original Windows 3.1 installation.  Then, whenever
        a new software package is installed, a new chapter snapshot could
        be taken.

        ARJ ac winback c:\windows\*.* -r -a1 -jt1

        If a Windows problem develops, one can restore Windows back to
        any particular chapter for testing.

        ARJ x winback c:\ -y -jb5           restore chapter 5

        This chapter feature is especially useful for software developers.
        Since a chapter archive can contain up to 250 chapters, the change
        history of a software source directory for a period of weeks can be
        maintained in a single archive.  You could take four chapter
        snapshots per day for over two months to a single archive.  This
        would allow you to restore your source directory to one or more
        points in time to help you track the appearance of software
        problems.

        See the "-jb" option for more details.

        The limitation on the maximum number of chapters is an internal
        resource issue as well as a "recommendation" to build a new
        archive.  Making thousands of modifications to important backup
        data is a somewhat risky activity.

        Please note that deleting files or purging old chapters from a
        multiple volume archive is not recommended.  With a multiple
        volume archive, deletions do not save space, so deletions are not 
        useful.


     WINDOWS 9x LONG FILENAME SUPPORT:

        This version of ARJ supports the use of long filenames under the
        Windows 9x GUI in the MS-DOS Prompt environment.  It does not
        support long filenames under MS-DOS 6.22 and below or in Windows 
        NT/2000.  It supports long filenames ONLY when the Windows 9x GUI 
        (graphical user interface) is running.  In other words, there is 
        no long filename support in Windows 9x MS-DOS mode (accessed from 
        the Win9x shutdown menu).  Moreover, there is NO long filename 
        support in ARJ for Windows NT/2000.

        Windows 9x DOS support (and therefore ARJ) do not support access
        to long filenames containing certain characters.  For example, a
        filename containing the copyright symbol or the trademark symbol
        cannot be accessed in a Win9x DOS window with the COPY command
        or with ARJ.  These type of filenames can only be accessed via
        their short names.  The Win9x system normally stores filename
        characters as two bytes per symbol allowing an alphabet of 65536
        possible symbols.  Because Win9x DOS only uses one byte per
        character position allowing only a 256 symbol alphabet, many
        characters are displayed by Win9x DOS as "_".

        In addition, ARJ does not support files over 2 GB in size.
        
        The small ARJ self-extractor (-je1) does NOT support the handling
        of long filenames.

        The ARJSFX and ARJSFXV modules (-je) support long filename
        handling.  However, they will only extract archived Win9x long
        filename files under Win9x.  If long filename files are being
        extracted to plain DOS, an error message will be displayed.  They
        can be forced to extract the Win9x archived files with the "-j"
        option.

        For compatibility with MS-DOS and older versions of ARJ, ARJ can
        create a dual-name compatibility ARJ archive.  This is an archive
        with both shortnames and longnames stored in it.  The longnames are
        stored in the file comment field.  New versions of ARJ will treat
        the dual-name archive according to the operating system
        environment.  In other words, under MS-DOS, a dual-name archive
        will look like a shortname archive.  Under Win9x, a dual-name
        archive will look like a longname archive.  This is also true of
        the ARJSFX and ARJSFXV/32 modules (-je).

        For efficiency reasons ARJ does not repeatedly check for file
        system support of long filenames.  ARJ only tests the "C:" file
        system.  An error may occur if ARJ under Win9x tries to access a
        disk drive that does not support long filename handling.  The "-hf"
        option can be used to force ARJ to use the standard 8.3 filename
        APIs instead of the longname APIs.  

        On a more technical note, ARJ detects long filename support by two
        tests.  The first is that the OS is 7.0 or higher.  The second is
        via the "Get volume information" api.

        There are five new options "-hf", "-hf1", "-hf2", "-hf3", and 
        "-hf4" that provide choices in the handling of long filenames.  
        See the discussion of those options below for more information.

        ARJ will save Win9x long filenames in the letter case they are
        stored on disk; however, all filename matching is done without
        regard to case.  In other words, "ThisName.Ext" matches
        "thisNAME.ext".

        When archiving files under Windows 9x, be sure to EXCLUDE files
        from processing that are OPEN such as WIN386.SWP.

        REMINDER: When specifying filenames with embedded blanks or
        symbols like ">", "<", or "|" on the command line, you MUST
        quote the filenames.

        Examples:  ARJ a archive "C:\Program Files\*.*" -r
                   ARJ c archive "<<<*" -jz -jb

        When specifying a target directory name that contains spaces, you
        must quote the directory name.  If the name specification ends in
        a "\" backslash (needed for a non-existent directory), you must 
        insert a space after the "\".  Alternatively, you can use the 
        "-ht" option.  The built-in C run-time library uses the "\" as a
        character escape symbol.

        Example:  ARJ x archive "C:\Program Files\ "    or
                  ARJ x archive "-htC:\Program Files"

        For Windows 9x disaster recovery, we make use of the program
        DOSLFNBK.EXE 2.3 by D. J. Murdoch.  With this program while in
        plain DOS, you can save all of the long filenames to BACKUP.LFN.
        Then you can use ARJ or any other DOS backup scheme to backup
        your system including the BACKUP.LFN.

        CAUTION: Please check the version of DOSLFNBK you are using.  Some
        versions do not support FAT32 partitions.

        Here is a brief list of steps to backup and restore:

        1) Make a Win9x startup diskette.
        2) Shutdown to MS DOS mode.
        3) While you are on the C: drive, execute "DOSLFNBK C:\".
           Change to the D: drive (if any) and execute "DOSLFNBK D:\".
           Execute DOSLFNBK for each drive on each drive.
        4) Use ARJ or other DOS backup program to backup ALL of the files.
           Example:  ARJ a A:backup C:\*.* D:\*.* -r -a1 -jt1 -va -jf
           CAUTION: For important backups, we always make TWO BACKUPS of
           our system.  All too often, one or more files will not restore
           correctly because of some data error (MURPHY'S LAW in action).
        5) Save ARJ.EXE or your backup program to diskettes in a
           restorable form.
        6) Backup finished.


        1) Boot from your Win9x startup diskette.
        2) Execute "SYS C:" from the A: drive to re-install the boot.
        3) Install ARJ.EXE or your backup program on the hard drive.
        4) Restore all of the files.
           Example:  ARJ x A:backup -v -jf -y -ha
        5) On each drive, execute "DOSLFNBK /r" to restore the long
           filenames.
        6) Restore finished.


     ARJ VOLUME NAMING OPTIONS

        By default, ARJ has been naming subsequent volumes in a multiple
        volume archive by using a numeric file extension (archive.arj,
        archive.a01, archive.a02, and so on).  Because the file extension 
        changes, this naming scheme may not be appropriate in an Internet 
        environment.  Some browsers will not properly download an ARJ
        archive with the normal LEFT mouse click.  Most browsers will
        properly download an EXE file with a LEFT mouse click.

        New to ARJ 2.71 and ARJ32 3.04 is an OPTIONAL naming scheme that 
        maintains the initial file extension (EXE or ARJ) and numbers the 
        filenames.  This option is set with the "e" option for "-v".

        Examples:  ARJ a archive -ve1440        =>
                       archive.arj, arch001.arj, arch002.arj, ....
                   ARJ a archive -je -ve1440    =>
                       archive.exe, arch001.exe, arch003.exe, ....
                   ARJ a name001 -je -ve1440    =>
                       name001.exe, name002.exe, name003.exe, ....
                                                        
        If the base archive name ends with a number, ARJ will use that 
        number as the base volume number.

        When building a multiple volume self-extractor using the "-ve"
        option, ARJ will put the self-extractor ONLY in the first volume.
        Subsequent EXE volumes include an EXE stub that displays a usage 
        message.

        Versions of ARJ before 2.71 and ARJ32 before 3.04 will not be
        able to process this alternately named multiple volume archive.


     ARJ-PROTECT DATA PROTECTION FEATURE:

        With this version, ARJ can repair "protected" archives that suffer
        from slight amounts of data damage (CRC error, bad header, etc). 
        An ARJ archive is "protected" with the "-hk" option.  With the 
        "-hk" option, ARJ will generate ARJ damage protection data.  This 
        data is appended to the protected archive.  This data is REQUIRED 
        in order to repair damaged ARJ archives.  The size of this data 
        ranges from a minimum of 4K bytes and larger.  For larger 
        archives, the protection data size is typically less than one
        percent of the archive file size.  Before this release, the 
        ARJ-PROTECT was saved in a separate .XRJ file.

        At this release, ARJ sets an AUTO ARJ-PROTECT flag within a 
        protected archive (except for ARJ-SECURED archives), so that 
        future updates to the archive will include ARJ-PROTECTION.  "ARJ y 
        archive -hk" can be used to clear that flag.

        This protection feature is sector based and allows repair due to
        typical types of disk corruption (bad sector, virus damage, cross
        links, etc).  This type of sector protection is NOT effective for
        most data transmission problems where data is missing from the
        middle of a transmission.

        It is STRONGLY recommended that ARJ-PROTECT be used on archives of
        important data and on archives on diskettes.  The majority of
        reports of archive damage is due to diskette errors.

        Technically, this protection feature uses a series of XOR sums and
        checksums in order to allow repairs.  Larger archives are logically
        treated as several streams of data.  ARJ can protect each "stream"
        from one or two damaged sections 1024 bytes in size.  However, for
        large archives (1 MB or larger) ARJ can sometimes repair up to four
        damaged sections per MByte.  The "-hk1, "-hk2" .... "-hk9" options
        can offer more data protection at the cost of a proportionately
        larger protection data.

        The "-hk" option sets ARJ to build a protected archive.  The "q"
        command is used to repair a damaged archive.  The repaired archive
        is named ARJFIXED.ARJ.  The original damaged archive is not 
        modified.

        Example:  ARJ a archive -hk       ARJ-PROTECTED
                  ARJ q archive           repairs archive.arj


     ARJ ANSI COMMENT HANDLING:

        As of version 2.55, ARJ will use its own ANSI sequence display
        handler to display ARJ comments.  In previous versions, ARJ
        depended upon the "-ja" option and an installed ANSI.SYS driver to
        handle the ANSI escape sequences.  The "-ja" option has a new
        function now. The "-ja" option will set the "P" command to display
        files using the new ANSI sequence display handler.

        The ARJSFXV module (-je -v) also will display ANSI comments now.

        Please note that the ARJ comment field size is limited to about 2K
        bytes.


     THE FILESPEC "...":

        Several times in this document and the UPDATE.TXT file, there is
        mention of the filespec "..." (not to be confused with my use of
        "...." in this document to mean "and so on").  This filespec is
        chosen so as not to match any existing filename.  ARJ will NOT
        generate an error or warning for not matching "..." specifically.

        This is a problem when using ARJ on a NOVELL network as the
        filespec "..." is a valid directory name.  A partial workaround
        is to specify a non-existent filespec such as "@@@" in place of
        "...".  Or you may use the "-hn" option to specify a name that is
        not to match any filename.


     ARJ ERROR SITUATIONS:

        ADD:

        If a user specified file is not found during an add, ARJ will
        continue processing, and will keep the archive and terminate with
        an error condition.  Note that files specified within an ARJ
        listfile that are not found during an add will NOT trigger an error
        unless the "-hl" option is also specified.

        In a disk full condition or any other file i/o error, ARJ will
        promptly terminate with an error condition and delete the temporary
        archive file unless the user has specified the "-jk" switch.


        MOVE:

        ARJ will only delete files that have been successfully added to the
        archive.  If you have specified the "-jt" (test) switch, ARJ will
        abort on any error.  If you specify the "-jk" switch, ARJ will keep
        the temporary archive upon an abort.


        EXTRACT:

        In a disk full condition or any other file i/o error, ARJ will
        promptly terminate with an error condition and delete the current
        output file.


        CRC ERRORS OR BAD FILE DATA:

        In the case where an ARJ archive has been corrupted, ARJ will
        report a CRC error or a Bad file data error.  These corruptions can
        be the result of an unreliable diskette, a computer memory problem,
        a file transfer glitch, or incompatible CACHING software. Most of
        these errors are the result of file transfer glitches and bad
        diskettes.  A few are the result of an incompatible interaction
        with SUPER PCKWIK 3.3 advanced diskette support or Windows 3.x.

        Individual files in an archive that are affected by the CRC or Bad
        file data errors CANNOT be recovered in an undamaged state.  Other 
        files in a damaged archive can be recovered by extracting them 
        using the "-jr" option.

        However, with some preventative action as in the use of the "-hk"
        option to generate a data damage protected archive, slightly
        corrupted ARJ archives can be fully repaired and all damaged files
        recovered in an undamaged state.


        CRITICAL ERROR HANDLER:

        ARJ sets up an interactive critical error handler to handle DOS
        critical errors like "sector not found" and "drive not ready". When
        a critical error occurs, ARJ will prompt the user with the message
        "Retry Y/N?".  The user may retry the failed operation by pressing
        "Y".  Pressing "N" will fail the operation or abort to DOS
        depending upon the version of DOS.  The user can press Control
        BREAK to abort to DOS.


     ARJ DOS ERRORLEVELS:

        ARJ returns a number of DOS errorlevels for different situations.

        0 ->   success
        1 ->   warning (specified file to add to archive not found,
                        specified file to list, extract, etc., not found,
                        or answering negatively to "OK to proceed to next
                        volume...." prompt)
        2 ->   fatal error
        3 ->   CRC error (header or file CRC error)
        4 ->   ARJ-SECURITY error or attempt to update an ARJ-SECURED archive
        5 ->   disk full or write error
        6 ->   cannot open archive or file
        7 ->   simple user error (bad parameters)
        8 ->   not enough memory
        9 ->   not an ARJ archive
       10 ->   XMS memory error (read or write)
       11 ->   user control break
       12 ->   too many chapters in archive

        Please note that DOS batchfiles have a unique method of testing
        for a DOS errorlevel.  The batch statement IF ERRORLEVEL 0 ....
        means if the errorlevel is EQUAL TO or GREATER THAN 0.  Generally,
        one should test for the highest possible errorlevels first and
        proceed lower as in:

        ARJ a archive *.*
        if errorlevel 9 goto not_arj
        if errorlevel 8 goto no_memory
        .
        .
        .
        if errorlevel 1 goto minor_error
        type ARJ command successful


     ARJ USER ACTION PROMPTS:

        ARJ prompts the user for action at certain times.  There are
        several types of prompts.  One is for yes/no permission, another is
        for a new filename, another is for archive comments, and one other
        is for search strings.

        The ARJ yes/no user prompts provide a lot of flexibility.  In
        addition to the normal yes and no responses, ARJ also accepts the
        following responses: quit, always, skip, global, and command.

        "Global" sets ARJ to inhibit all subsequent user prompts by assuming
        YES for all queries as if "-y" were specified.

        "Always" sets ARJ to assume YES for subsequent queries of the same
        class.  For example, answering ALWAYS to the overwrite query will
        assume YES for ALL subsequent overwrite queries.

        "Skip" sets ARJ to assume NO for ALL subsequent queries of the same
        class.

        After "always" or "skip" responses, subsequent user prompt
        messages will still be output to the screen but no user response
        will be accepted.

        "Command" prompts for one DOS command and then executes it.  ARJ
        then returns to expect an answer to the current yes/no query.  You
        should keep the query in mind as ARJ does NOT always redisplay
        the full query message.

        Since ARJ uses STDIN for user input, be careful about typing ahead
        anticipating prompts.  ARJ may prompt you for an unexpected action
        and use your earlier input.

        The "-jyy" option lets you change the prompting modes to single
        character query mode.  See the section on "-jy" for more
        information.


     ARJ ENVIRONMENT VARIABLE/CONFIGURATION FILE:

        ARJ will first look for an environment variable named ARJ_SW and
        use its value as switch options for ARJ.  If ARJ finds such an
        environment variable, it will display a message to that effect.

        You can inhibit ARJ from using this environment variable by using
        the "-+" option.  You can also set the name of the environment
        variable with the "-+" option as in ARJ a -+ARJ_SW2 archive.

        SET ARJ_SW=<switches>

        Example:  SET ARJ_SW=-w\temp -k -e

        Do NOT add any blanks after the variable name ARJ_SW.  As in LHARC,
        command line switches can be selected to override ARJ_SW settings.

        ARJ32 uses ARJ32_SW as its default variable.
        
        ARJ will allow you to use a different switch character "-" or "/"
        in ARJ_SW and in the command line except when using the "-ju"
        (unix) option.

        If the ARJ_SW environment variable specifies a filename (text not
        beginning with a switch character), ARJ will open that filename and
        scan it looking for a line of text that begins in column 1 with the
        same letter as the ARJ command being executed.  The following text
        is processed as the ARJ_SW switches.  This allows each ARJ command
        to have its own switch settings.  In addition, ARJ will also look
        for the "+" (plus) symbol in column 1 to use as a miscellaneous
        switch string.  This string will be added to any command switch
        string found if any.  If no command switch string is found, ARJ
        will use the miscellaneous switch string as the ARJ_SW switch
        settings.  NOTE that the "+" switch settings will NOT be used if
        the "+" string occurs below the command switch string.

        New at ARJ 2.73 and ARJ32 3.06 is the "-" (minus) symbol in column
        1 to use as a miscellaneous switch string.  It works similar to the
        "+" symbol EXCEPT that the following switch string is prepended to
        any subsequent command switch string.  The "+" symbol causes its
        switch string to be appended.  This affects switch processing.

        SET ARJ_SW=C:\ARJ\ARJ.CFG

        C:\ARJ\ARJ.CFG contains:
        a -jm1 -jt -i1
        c -zcomment.txt
        + -jv
        l -jp
        e -i1

        AND is equivalent to:
        a -jm1 -jt -i1
        c -zcomment.txt
        l -jp -jv
        e -i1 -jv
        f -jv
        v -jv
        all other commands use -jv

        In the above example, any ARJ "a" commands will use "-jm1 -jt -i1"
        as the ARJ_SW switch options.

        C:\ARJ\ARJ.CFG contains:
        a -jm1 -jt -i1
        - -i
        l -jp
        e -i-

        AND is equivalent to:
        a -jm1 -jt -i1
        l -jp -i
        e -i -i-
        all other commands use -i

        In the above example, the "e" command switch is chosen to cancel 
        the general "-i" option.  This feature would not work using the 
        "+" symbol instead of the "-" symbol.  The "-" symbol is likely 
        more useful than using the "+" symbol.
         
        The ARJ_SW variable or the ARJ_SW configuration file switch
        settings may NOT have quoted switches such as "-vasformat a:".

        As of this release, ARJ will also accept the commands "ac", "cc",
        and "dc" in the ARJ configuration file.

        SET ARJ_SW=C:\ARJ\ARJ.CFG

        C:\ARJ\ARJ.CFG contains:
        a  -jm1 -jt -i1
        ac -jm -jt
        dc -jt


     ARJ COMMAND LINE SYNTAX:

        ARJ <command> [-<switch>[-|+|<option>]....] <archive_name>[.ARJ]
        [<base_directory_name>\] [<!list_name>|<path_name>|<wild_name>....]

        or

        ARJ @response_filename [-&] | [-+] | [-+environment_variable] |
        [-gpassword] | [-g?]


        Commands and switches can be entered in upper or lower case.
        Switches can be placed anywhere after the command ARJ.

        ARJ supports the use of either "-" or "/" as the switch option
        character.  The first occurrence of either "-" or "/" that ARJ
        encounters in the ARJ_SW variable will determine the switch symbol
        for processing ARJ_SW.  The first occurrence of either "-" or "/"
        that ARJ encounters in the command line will determine the switch
        symbol for processing the command line except when the "-ju" (unix)
        option has been specified in ARJ_SW.  You may NOT mix and match
        switch symbols.  Throughout this document, the symbol "/" may be
        substituted for "-" in switch usage.

        Examples:  ARJ a A:archive *.* /va /r    is correct
                   ARJ a A:archive *.* /va -r    IS INCORRECT USAGE!

        Switches specified on the command line will either toggle or
        override switches specified with the ARJ_SW environment variable.
        Switch usage is identical to that of LHARC.

        "-s+"        turns on switch "s".
        "-s-"        turns off switch "s".
        "-s"         toggles the state of switch "s".
        "-sname"     provides the name argument for switch "-s".
        "--"         skip processing of any more switch options.

        Switch options CAN be combined to save command line length.
        However, some switch options take optional string arguments and
        therefore, must be the last option in a combined argument token
        string because ARJ accepts the rest of the argument token as the
        optional argument.  You can combine "-r" and "-i" to make "-ri".
        You can combine "-wd:\" and "-i" with "-iwd:\", because the switch
        option taking the string argument is last.  Please note that
        switches that ONLY accept the "+", "-", "0", "1", "2" modifiers can
        be combined in any order.  The following switches must be last in a
        combined switch argument:  -g, -l, -m, -o, -t, -v, -w, -x, -z,
        -!, -$, -h#, -hb, -hc, -hg, -hk, -hm, -hn, -hx, -jb, -jc, -jd,
        -jh, -ji, -jn, -jq, -jp, -js, -jw, -jx, -jy, -jz.

        WARNING:  The "j" in "-jX" option switches is a SHIFT symbol.
        Therefore, a combined "-jatv" is a combination of "-ja", "-jt", and
        "-jv", since the "j" shifts the meaning of subsequent symbols in
        the argument token string.  The use of more than ONE "j" shift
        symbol per argument token string is NOT supported for future
        versions.

        Examples:  -rijvta   <=>  -r -i -jv -jt -ja
                   -i1kwd:\  <=>  -i1 -k -wd:\

        ARJ will accept an ending "-" on most switches such as "-w-".  The
        "-x" switch option is one exception.  The one caveat is that for
        switches that support an optional argument such as "-wd:\" or
        "-t1", that switch option must NOT be followed by a concatenated
        switch option such as "-w-r".  An argument token string such is
        "-rikw-" is acceptable because the "-w" option is the last one. One
        special switch combination is the "-jyyr" combination.  You can
        turn off the "y" and "r" modifiers with "-jyyr-".

        The switch option "--" tells ARJ that there are no more switch
        options to process in the current command line.  This is useful
        when you need to enter filenames beginning with "-".

        Example:  ARJ a archive -- -testfile

        The standard ARJ file suffix is ".ARJ".  Subsequent multiple 
        volume archives end in ".A01", ".A02", etc, up to .A99, .100, .101 
        to .999. It is possible to have multiple volumes start at ".001" 
        and go up to ".999".

        The ARJ command must be the first non-switch argument after "ARJ".
        The ARJ archive name must be the first filename on the command
        line.  The base directory, if any, must be the second filename
        argument.  The switches and other filenames can be in any order.
        The base directory name should end with "\" (backslash) or ":"
        (colon).  However, ARJ will still accept directory names without
        the "\" character if the directory already exists.  This feature is
        limited to the add type and extract type commands.

        Wild_names follow MS-DOS convention.  "*.*" means all files.
        "*.DOC" means all files with an extension of ".DOC".  "?B*.*"
        means all files with a second character of "B".

        The default for <wild_name> for all commands except for "d" is
        "*.*".

        For the add, move, freshen and update commands, filename matching
        in the archive requires an exact path match depending upon the "-e"
        option.  For non-update commands, specified filenames with paths
        will force a full pathname match.

        You can supply one or more filenames for files containing lists of
        files to be added to an archive.  The filenames must be listed one
        per line with no leading or trailing blanks.  The list filename(s)
        must be prefixed with "!".  If you want to archive a filename
        beginning with !, you must use the "-!" option to set a new list
        file character.

        You can exclude filenames/wildnames from the list of filenames to
        be processed by ARJ.

        Example:  ARJ a software *.* -x*.exe -x*.obj   adds all files
        in the current directory except .EXE and .OBJ files.

        REMINDER: When specifying filenames with embedded blanks or
        symbols like ">", "<", or "|" on the command line, you MUST
        quote the filenames.

        Examples:  ARJ a archive "C:\Program Files\*.*" -r
                   ARJ c archive "<<<*" -jz -jb


     ARJ RESPONSE FILE SYNTAX:

        ARJ @response_filename [-&] | [-+] | [-+environment_variable] |
        [-gpassword] | [-g?]

        ARJ will accept an ARJ command line from a response file as in
        "ARJ @command.rsp".  The "@" symbol indicates that the appended
        name is the name of the response file.  In this case, the file is
        command.rsp. The response file symbol cannot be changed. Only one
        ARJ command line can be processed per response file.

        The response file should contain the ARJ command line minus the
        initial "ARJ".  The command line may be split over as many lines as
        necessary.  The response file feature will NOT accept QUOTED
        command line options.  Options with embedded blanks ("-vasTEST X")
        will not be processed as expected.  See the "-@" option for help on
        options with blanks.  When using the response file feature, ARJ
        will accept only the "-+", "-&", "-g" switch options on the DOS
        command line along with the response file name.  All other command
        options must be specified in the response file or in the ARJ
        environment variable.

        To better support long filenames, ARJ provides the "-@" option to
        handle the processing of filenames and switch options that contain
        embedded spaces.  The "-@" switch option enables the interpretation
        of a text line in an ARJ response file as a single token.  In other
        words, when ARJ scans an "-@" option, it will process the NEXT text
        line in the response file as a single token including all embedded,
        leading, and trailing blanks.  ARJ will continue to process each
        subsequent text line in the same manner.  If ARJ scans a subsequent
        "-@" option, ARJ will revert to its normal multiple tokens per line
        processing.

        PLEASE NOTE THAT THE ARJ COMMAND LINE WHETHER OR NOT IN THE
        RESPONSE FILE IS STILL LIMITED TO 64 FILENAMES OR WILDNAMES.  THE
        LISTFILE FEATURE SHOULD BE USED TO SPECIFY MORE THAN 64 FILENAMES
        OR WILDNAMES.


     ARCHIVE NAME WILDCARDING:

        You can specify a wildcard for the archive name such as "*.ARJ" for
        all ARJ commands except for the add commands (a, f, j, m, u).  If
        you also specify the "-r" switch,  ARJ will search subdirectories
        for ARJ archives (*.ARJ) also.

        Example:  ARJ l -r *             will list all of your *.ARJ files.
                  ARJ c *.arj -zbbs.cmt  will comment all of your archives.

        As of 2.55c, the list of filenames that ARJ builds internally for
        archiving is now affected by the "-o" and "-b" and "-hb" options.

        Prior to 2.55c, ARJ would include all matching filenames in its
        internal list regardless of the "-o" and "-b" settings.  Then
        during archival, ARJ would select from its internal list based upon
        the "-o" and "-b" and "-hb" options.

        Now ARJ uses the "-o" and "-b" and "-hb" options while it is
        building the internal list.  The advantage with this method is the
        need for less memory to handle fewer files.

        For example, when doing a full backup of the C drive, ARJ builds an
        internal list of filenames for all of the files on drive C.  When
        doing an incremental backup (-b, -b1), ARJ builds a list of
        filenames for only the files that have the archive bit set.  In
        prior versions of ARJ, ARJ would build the same list regardless of
        the "-b" setting.

        ARJ wildcarding can differ according to the operating system
        environment.  When scanning the file system for filenames to
        add/update an archive, ARJ uses the internal operating system
        wildcard matching functions. When scanning an ARJ archive (list,
        extract and so on), ARJ uses its own wildcard matching function.
        This internal ARJ function is identical to the standard DOS
        wildcard matching.

        Windows 9x and Windows NT/2K use a slightly more complex wildcard
        matching function.  In Windows 9x, it is possible to specify a
        wildcard specification of "a*d*c".  This would match ARJ.TXT,
        ARJDISP.TXT, and others.

        As of ARJ 2.55c, ARJ will handle up to 65,000 filenames in its 
        internal list.  Because ARJ checks for duplicate filenames when 
        necessary, processing over 20,000 filenames may slow down as the 
        number of filenames processed increase.  ARJ processes wildcards 
        most efficiently when specified as separate command line wildcards 
        inclusive of drive letters.  

        Example: ARJ a backup C:\*.* D:\*.* E:\*.* -r -a1

        If each drive letter is unique, ARJ will not need to check for
        duplicates and can proceed faster.  This speedup does not work when
        using listfiles.

        
     ARJ COMMANDS:

        ac: Add Chapter to archive

           This is a new two character command for ARJ.  It is actually an
           abbreviation for the following command and switch options: "u
           -u2 -jb".  The "ac" command will add a chapter backup to a new
           archive or add a new chapter (updating) to a chapter archive. A
           chapter backup will consists of files that are DIFFERENT
           (different date-time or size).

           Example:  ARJ ac archive c:\dir\*.* -r -jt

           The advantage of a chapter archive is that you can make numerous
           full backups (chapters) to a SINGLE archive.  Major space
           savings will result when some files do not change from backup to
           backup.

           See the "-jb" option for more details.

           Adding a new chapter adds a chapter label entry in the archive.

           There is a limit of 250 chapters per archive.

           Please note that the "ac" command abbreviation is dependent upon
           file sizes and file date-time stamps.  Modifying file date-time
           stamps with no relation to the system time may cause chapter
           update problems.  In addition, changing the system time
           significantly may also cause chapter update problems.

        a: Add files to archive

           This is the basic command to add disk files to an ARJ archive.
           You can specify 0 to 64 filename arguments (one can be a
           destination directory).  The arguments can be wildnames.  If
           you specify the "-r" switch (recurse subdirectories), ARJ
           will add all of the files in all of the subdirectories that
           match the specified wildname.

           Example:  ARJ a archive subdir\*.*
                     Archive all files in directory "subdir".

           For maximum compression, use the "-jm" switch option.

        b: execute Batch or DOS command

           The ARJ b command allows a user to execute a DOS command on
           selected files in an archive.  The ARJ b command will prompt for a
           DOS command string to execute per selected file.  By default ARJ
           will extract the selected files to the filename ARJTEMP.$$$.  This
           filename can be changed with the "-jw" option.  The base directory
           option is ignored by the ARJ b command.  The output file will be
           deleted by ARJ after the DOS command is executed.

           Examples:  ARJ b archive
                      ARJ b archive file.exe -jwtemp\tempfile

           This option can substitute for a simple extract and run command
           where the file to be extracted is an executable.  You would specify
           a temporary executable name as the output name and use that name as
           the DOS command to be executed.

           Example:  ARJ b archive file.exe -jwTEMP.EXE
                     TEMP arguments

           You can supply the DOS command string on the command line with
           the "-jq" option.  Switch options which have embedded blanks
           must be enclosed by double quote marks.

           Examples:  ARJ b archive file.exe -jwTEMP.EXE -jqTEMP
                      ARJ b archive *.c "-jqgrep text ARJTEMP.$$$"

        c: Comment archive files

           This command allows you to comment the header and individual
           files.  ARJ will prompt you for each comment.  The user will be
           prompted for up to 25 lines for each comment.  A line containing
           only a [return] will terminate the comment.

           The user can choose to input comment data from a file by entering
           the comment filename preceded by an "!" as in "!archive.txt"
           starting in column 1 of the first comment line.  This file is
           read as a text file.  The lines in the text can be up to 2048
           bytes long.  Only the first 2048 bytes of the file will be
           accepted by ARJ.

           To erase a comment from an archive, type [space] [return] on the
           first comment line and [return] on the second comment line.

           To strip archive or file comments from an archive, you can use
           the NUL file feature of MS-DOS.

           Examples:  ARJ c archive -zNUL          strips archive comment
                      ARJ c archive name -jzNUL    strips comment for "name"
                      ARJ c archive -jzNUL         strips all file comments
                      ARJ c archive -zNUL -jzNUL   strips all comments

           To add only the archive comment and not file comments, use the
           following command:

           ARJ c archive -z

           To add only the archive comment at the command line, use the
           following command:

           ARJ c archive -zcomment.txt

           You may also comment an archive with the "a", "f", "m", "u"
           commands using the "-z" option.  The "-jz" option may not be
           used in the same manner.

           ARJ a -zcomment.txt archive *.txt

       cc: Convert standard archive to Chapter archive

           This is a new two character command for ARJ.  It is actually an
           abbreviation for the following command and switch option:
           "y -jb".  The "cc" command will convert a standard ARJ archive
           to a chapter archive.

           Example:  ARJ cc archive

        d: Delete files from archive

           This command allows you to delete files from the archive.  When
           wildcard selection is not suitable, you can use the "-q" switch
           to set ARJ to prompt you for deletion for each file selected.
           These deleted files are physically removed from the archive.

           Example:  ARJ d archive *.c
                     Delete all files in archive ending in ".c".

                     ARJ d -q archive *.c
                     Prompt before deleting each file ending in ".c".

           If specify "*.*" as the filespec, ARJ will prompt for permission
           to delete.  You can specify the "-y" or "-jyd" options to
           inhibit the delete prompt.

           If ARJ removes all files from an archive, it will delete the
           empty archive.

           The delete command normally only deletes files of the last 
           chapter in chapter archives.

           You can specify the "-n" (new) option to delete the files in the
           archive that DO NOT EXIST on the disk.  You can use the same
           "-n" option with "ARJ l" to list the files that DO NOT EXIST on
           the disk.  This is useful in synchronizing an archive to a
           directory along with an update command.

           Examples:  ARJ d archive *.* -n
                      ARJ l archive temp\ *.doc -n
                      ARJ d archive temp\ *.doc -n

       dc: Delete last Chapter from archive

           This is a new two character command for ARJ.  It is actually an
           abbreviation for the following command and switch option:
           "d -jb".  The "dc" command will delete the last chapter in an
           archive using the specified file wildcard.  Normally, that
           wildcard should be "*.*".

           Example:  ARJ dc archive *.*

        e: Extract files from archive

           This command will extract one or more files from the archive to
           the current directory or base directory if specified.  ARJ will
           prompt the user before overwriting existing files unless the
           user specifies the "-y" switch.  If the user gives a "no"
           answer, ARJ will prompt for a new filename.  If the user enters
           a single [return] instead of a filename, ARJ will skip the
           current file extraction.

           Example:  ARJ e archive soft\ *.c
                     Extract all files ending in ".c" to subdirectory
                     "soft".

           When extracting a file located on multiple volumes, ARJ may
           prompt the user with an "Append? " prompt.  This will usually
           occur with files split across volumes.  You will also need to
           specify the "-v" switch to set ARJ to continue to the next
           volume of a series of volumes.  When extracting from one of a
           series of multiple volumes on a diskette, it is easier to use
           the wildcard "*.*" to specify the archive as in:

           ARJ e archive A:*.* filespecs

           If you wish to extract only a portion of an archive and that
           portion is a directory containing directories, you should use
           the "-p1" switch.  See the "-p" switch for more information.

           The ARJ e and ARJ x commands now accept the "-d" option to
           provide an extract and delete option.  This feature requires
           that you specify the files to extract and delete.  ARJ will NOT
           default to "*.*" for this option.  This option actually uses
           more disk space than a simple extraction because of the
           temporary archive that is created during the extraction process.

           ARJ e archive -d file1 file2

           If ARJ encounters a disk full during extraction, ARJ will abort
           with an error.  You can bypass the abort by using the "-jd"
           option.  Refer to the description of "-jd" for more information.

           If ARJ encounters a CRC or Bad file data error during
           extraction, ARJ will delete the corrupted extracted file unless
           the "-jr" option is used.

           With the "-ho" and "-ho1" options, you can extract files from an
           archive based upon the success or failure of a text string
           search.  Refer to the description of the "-ho" and
           "-ho1"options for details.

           Examples:  ARJ e archive -ho
                      ARJ e archive -ho -jq+3+textstring

        f: Freshen files in archive

           Update matching files in the archive that are OLDER than the
           selected disk files.

           Example:  arj f archive *.c *.h

           In freshening archives, you should use the same filename
           specifications that you used to create the archive.

           Example:  arj a archive \temp\ *.* -r
                     arj f archive \temp\ *.* -r

           If no files or comments have been added to the archive, ARJ
           will not rewrite the archive at ARJ 2.20 and above.

           When updating a file in an archive with a file that is NOT
           newer and if the -jv option is selected, ARJ will display a
           message that there is "no change".

        g: Garble files in archive

           The ARJ "g" command allows a user to garble an already built ARJ
           archive.  Please note that only ungarbled files will be garbled
           by the ARJ "g" command.

           Example:  ARJ g archive -gdinosaur

           ARJ also includes a "-hg" option to specify the use of a special
           powerful encryption routine.  There is a "-hg!" option to specify
           the use of a 40 bit encryption module.

           Some archives created with earlier ARJ versions cannot be 
           "g"arbled.

        i: check Integrity of ARJ.EXE

           The "i" command allows the user to check the integrity of the
           ARJ.EXE program.  ARJ will report "CRC ERROR!" if the tested ARJ
           program does not pass its integrity check.  This indicates that
           the program is probably corrupted.  Please note that the "i"
           command should not be used on a compressed ARJ executable
           (DIETed, LZEXEd, etc.), since the "i" command will then ALWAYS
           report a CRC error.  If the program name is not specified, then
           ARJ will check the current program being executed.

           Syntax:  ARJ i ARJ.EXE
                    ARJ i            at DOS 3.0 and up

        j: Join archives to archive

           The "j" command allows the user to merge several ARJ archives.

           Syntax:  ARJ j archive archive1.arj archive2.arj
                    ARJ j archive *.arj -r

           Some switches NOT supported by the "j" command are:  -o, -ob,
           -f, -u, -c, -v.  Note that there is no error message displayed
           by ARJ when using an unsupported switch with the "j" command.

           The "-d" option IS supported by the "j" command.

           Note that switches that do work like "-x" select the archives to
           be merged and NOT the contents of the archives.

           This command can be used to convert an SFX module to a regular
           ARJ archive.

           Example:  ARJ j new_name arjsfx.exe

        k: purge chapter bacKup files in archive

           The ARJ k command works similar to the ARJ d command except that
           the ARJ k command only deletes files that are not in the last
           chapter.  The ARJ k command requires a wildname or filespec as a
           selection option.  This command will ONLY work with chapter
           archives.

           Examples:  ARJ k archive *.*
                      ARJ k archive *.doc -q

        l: List contents of archive

           List contents of archive to standard output.  The display can be
           paused after each screenful with the "-jp" switch.  The files
           are listed in stored order.  There are no sort options
           currently.

           The last field on the display BTPMGVX stands for:
               B -> file not contained in the last chapter (obsolete file)
               T -> text/binary/directory/chapter/label type
               P -> path information available in "V" listing
               M -> compression method used
               G -> file has been garbled (encrypted)
               V -> archive has been continued to another volume
               X -> this file is an extended portion of a larger file

           Example:  arj l archive *.c *.h

           The "B" indicator shows files that are not contained in the last
           chapter backup of a chapter archive.  These files are removed
           when a purge (K command) is executed.

           For text mode compression, the original file size reported by
           the "l" and "v" commands is the actual number of bytes input.
           This is usually the MS-DOS file size minus the number of
           carriage returns in the file, since C text mode strips a file of
           carriage returns.

           You can use the "-n" option with "ARJ l" to list the files 
           that DO NOT EXIST on the disk.

           Example:  ARJ l archive temp\ *.doc -n

           As of ARJ 2.61, ARJ will display a count of filenames processed
           that have been labeled as Windows 9x long filenames.

           ARJ will display the count of files selected within an archive
           that have Windows long filenames.
           
           In the space preceding the date-time field, ARJ will display a 
           " " for year 2000, a "1" for the year 2100. 

           The "v" command will now display Win9x file date-time accessed
           and file date-time created properties if they exist in the archive.

           As of ARJ 2.62d, the output under the "G" of the BTPMGUX area is
           changed.  Instead of a simple "G" to indicate that the file is
           garbled, that field may contain the values "0", "1", "2", "3", or
           "4".  
           
           "0" indicates XOR garbling (archives created before 2.60).
           
           "1" indicates XOR garbling (archives created at 2.60 and greater). 

           "2" indicates GOST encryption with a 32 byte password limit.

           "3" indicates GOST encryption (ARJCRYPT.COM version 2.1).

           "4" indicates 40 bit encryption limit.
        
        m: Move files to archive

           This command is similar to specifying the "a" command with the
           "-d" switch.  The "m" commands adds the selected files to the
           archive.  If the adds are successful, then the added files are
           deleted.  The move command does not ask permission before
           deleting the files.  Use the "ARJ a -d" command for that
           feature.

           Example:  ARJ m archive soft\*.*

           The "m" command when used with "-f" and "-u" will delete any
           successfully added files as well as any files that are already
           up to date in the archive.  It is STRONGLY suggested that you
           always use the "-jt" option with move commands to set ARJ to
           verify the archive before deleting the input files.

           At ARJ 2.30 and above, ARJ will also attempt to delete any
           directories that are added to the archive.  Directories can ONLY
           be selected by using the "-a1" option.  Directories with
           UNSELECTED files will not be deleted.

           Example:  ARJ m archive -a1 soft\*.* soft   deletes soft
                     ARJ m archive -a1 soft\*.*        does not delete soft

        n: reName files in archive

           This command allows you to change the names of the files stored
           in an ARJ archive.  ARJ will prompt for the new name of each
           selected file.  You can skip changing the name of a particular
           file by entering a blank line.

           Example:  ARJ n archive *.c

           In the above example, ARJ prompts for new names for all *.c
           files.

           CAUTION:  For dual-name archives, this command only affects the
           DOS SHORTNAME filename and not the longname filename.

        o: Order files in archive

           This command allows you to re-order the files within the
           archive.  You may specify the order of files on the command line
           or you can use one or more list files.  Any files in the archive
           that are not specified on the command line or in a list file
           will be placed at the end of the archive in the same relative
           order that they were originally.  No wildcard names can be used
           as order specifications.  The filenames in the list file must be
           entered one per line.

           Example:  ARJ o archive file1 file2 file3

           In the above example, the files "file1", "file2", and "file3"
           will be ordered first in the archive.  Any remaining files will
           follow those.

           Example:  ARJ o archive !list

           In the above example, the archive will be ordered according to
           the order of the names in the file "list".

           *** NOTE: There is a 16,000 filename sorting limit. ***
           
           IMPORTANT:  For the "o"rder command, the list file option has
           one special feature.  If the list file is named ARJSORT.$$$, ARJ
           will expect the file to have been built with the ARJ v -jv1
           command.  This ARJSORT.$$$ list file may be specified with a
           pathspec.  See the ARJSORT.BAT batch file for an example of this
           special feature.

           To facilitate building list files, the "v" command in ARJ will
           produce special outputs with the "-jv" switch and the "-jv1"
           switch.

           The "-jv" switch will display only the pathnames stored within
           the archive.  No other listing data is displayed.  This output
           can be re-directed to a file for manual sorting into a list
           file.

           The "-jv1" switch will display the standard verbose display with
           a few modifications.  No sequential number field will be
           displayed.  No comment field will be displayed.  The pathname is
           appended to the archive file description data instead of being
           on a separate line.  Displayed just before the pathname field
           are the file extension and filename.  These fields are available
           so that the user can sort the text lines by date-time, file
           extension, CRC value, etc.  Text editors like Qedit and SLED
           allow the user to sort text lines via an embedded text field.

           At ARJ 2.20 and above, you cannot "o"rder a multiple volume
           archive and should not.

        p: Print files to standard output

           Output files to standard output.  This function works such that
           the output file will contain only the file data extracted.  This
           is important for UNIX-like usage.

           Example:  ARJ p archive manual.doc > output.fil

           In the above example, output.fil will be an exact copy of
           manual.doc.  There will be no extraneous header information in
           output.fil.  All extraction phase information is written to the
           STDERR device, which is normally the display screen.

           Example:  ARJ p archive manual.doc > LPT1

           In the above example, the standard output is redirected to the
           printer device.  This does not involve any intermediate disk
           files.  However, when redirecting to the printer, ARJ will
           translate binary files to text, causing possible loss of data.
           The ARJ command "ARJ e archive manual.doc -jwLPT1" will output a
           binary file to the printer without loss of data.

           ARJ sets the file date-time stamp of the output stream.  File
           viewing as in ARJ p archive name | LIST /s will display the
           correct file date and time.

           The "-jp" option can be used to pause the screen output as in the
           "s" command.  The "-jv" option will allow the display of IBM
           graphics characters with the "-jp" option.

           NOTE:  Because of a problem using fwrite() and STDOUT, errors
           occurring during redirection to serial and printer ports may not
           be detected.  Errors during redirection to disk files will be
           detected.

        q: repair a damaged ARJ-PROTECTED archive

           The "q" command is used to repair a damaged "protected" 
           archive.  An archive is protected with the "-hk" option.  It is
           important that an archive be protected prior to the damage.  
           The "q" command will attempt to repair all damages and put the 
           repaired archive in a file named ARJFIXED.ARJ.  ARJFIXED.ARJ 
           will also be newly ARJ-PROTECTED.

           Example:  ARJ q archive

           For older style ARJ-PROTECT archives (with accompanying .XRJ 
           file), you must specify the "-hk" option along with the "q" 
           command.

           Example:  ARJ q docs -hk                repairs archive
           
           When working with a damaged protected archive and the "Abort,
           Retry, Ignore, Fail" prompt appears, you should select the
           "Ignore" option.

        r: Remove paths from filenames

           This command sets ARJ to remove the path component from the
           specified filenames stored in the archive.  The default is all
           filenames stored in the archive.  This command is useful if you
           forgot to specify "-e" to exclude paths.

        s: Sample files to screen with pause

           This command is similar to the "p" command except that one
           screenful of data is displayed to the user and a user action is
           then requested.  The action prompt can be suppressed with the
           "-y" switch.

           The "s" command filters the text to output by truncating at 79
           characters per line and displaying '?' for control characters.
           The "-jv" option will allow the display of IBM graphics
           characters.

        t: Test integrity of archive

           Test the contents of the selected files for the correct CRC
           value.  ARJ uses a 32 bit CRC to validate the contents of the
           files.  The use of 32 bit CRCs is many times better than the
           use of 16 bit CRCs for the detection of errors.

           If the AUTO ARJ-PROTECT flag in the archive has been set, ARJ
           will also test the ARJ-PROTECT data at the end of the archive.
           
           When used with the "-hk" option, ARJ will test the archive and
           upon successful completion, will generate the ARJ-PROTECT file.

           Example:  ARJ t archive -hk

        u: Update files to archive

           Update older files in the archive and add files that are new to
           the archive.

           Example:  arj u software

           When updating a file in an archive with a file that is NOT
           newer and if the -jv option is selected, ARJ will display a
           message that there is "no change".

        v: Verbosely list contents of archive

           This command lists the full pathname and comments of the archive
           files as well as the same information as the "l" command.

           The "v" command now displays a sequence number preceding the
           pathname.  This number can be used with the "-#" option to
           access specific files within an archive.

           Example:  ARJ v archive
                     ARJ x archive -# 5 10

           Use the "-jp" switch to pause the output after each screen.

           The "-jv" switch will display only the pathnames to the screen.

           The "-jv1" switch will display the archive data in a manner
           suitable for sorting on various fields for use with the "o"
           command.

        w: Where are text strings in archive

           This command allows the user to search for text strings within
           archives.

           ARJ will prompt the user whether to ignore case when searching.
           This search option takes MS-DOS code pages into account so that
           casing of accented/umlauted characters will be done correctly.

           ARJ will also prompt the user for the number of lines of context
           of a match to display.  If a number greater than zero is chosen,
           ARJ will display the matched string and the surrounding context
           with all of the non-printable characters including newlines
           replaced by question marks.  The context lines displayed will be
           78 characters in length.  When the display context option is
           chosen, ARJ will inhibit the progress indicator.  If the "-jv"
           is set, IBM graphics characters (128 to 255) will be displayed.

           Then, this command will prompt the user for up to 20 text strings
           to search for within the archive.  A count of all matches will be
           displayed after each individual file is scanned.

           Search strings are limited to 79 characters.

           Matches that span archive volumes will not be detected by this
           string search.

           You can search multiple ARJ archives with a command like:

           ARJ w \docs\*.arj

           You may page pause the display with the "-jp" option.

           The "-jq" option can be used to supply the necessary parameters
           to the ARJ w command.

           The option string will be parsed as follows:
           1) the first character must be either "+" or "-" representing
              yes or no,
           2) the next character(s) represents the number of lines of
              context to display,
           3) the next character represents a non-digit separator,
           4) the next characters represent the search text.

           Examples:  ARJ w archive -jq+3+total    caseless search
                                                   display 3 context lines
                                                   search for "total"
                      ARJ w archive "-jq-2-to be"  case sensitive search
                                                   display 2 context lines
                                                   search for "to be"

           You can use the "-hw" options to change the way ARJ displays
           the filenames being searched.

        x: eXtract files with full pathname

           This command extracts one or more files from the archive to
           their full paths in the current directory or to the base
           directory if specified.  ARJ normally stores pathnames as if
           they were children of the target directory.  Any drive or root
           directory specifications are stripped before extracting unless
           the "-jf" switch is specified with the "x" command.

           Example:  arj x archive *.c

           If you wish to extract only a portion of an archive and that
           portion is a directory containing directories, you should use
           the "-p1" switch.  See the "-p" switch for more information.

           The ARJ e and ARJ x commands now accept the "-d" option to
           provide an extract and delete option.  This feature requires
           that you specify the files to extract and delete.  ARJ will NOT
           default to "*.*" for this option.

           Refer to the description of the "e" command for more
           information about extraction.

        y: copY archive with new options

           The ARJ y command provides an easy interface to the -je and
           -je1 options as well as to the -jb, -jb1, and -jb2 options.

           Examples:  ARJ y archive -je1  convert an archive to an SFX
                      ARJ y archive -jb   make an archive a chapter type
                      ARJ y archive -jb0  convert from a chapter type to
                                          a standard type

           When used with the "-g" option and optionally the "-hg" option,
           ARJ will ungarble a previously garbled archive.

           Example:  ARJ y archive -gpasswrd

           When used with the "-hk" option, ARJ will clear the ARJ-PROTECT
           flag and will also remove the ARJ-PROTECT data from the 
           archive.

           Example:  ARJ y archive -hk


     ARJ SWITCH OPTIONS:

        ?: Display full help screens

           The command "ARJ -?" displays several screens of help
           information with page pauses.  The command "ARJ -? -jp" displays
           the help screens without page pauses.  You can also redirect the
           output to a file as in:

           ARJ -? > help.txt

           ARJ may not detect network file redirection and will pause per
           screenful.

        -: skip any more switch options

           The switch option "--" will cause ARJ to stop looking for any
           more switch options on the command line.  This is useful for
           entering filenames beginning with "-".

           Example:  ARJ a archive -- -file

        +: inhibit ARJ_SW usage

           The switch option "-+" will inhibit ARJ from using the value of
           the ARJ_SW variable in ARJ switch processing.  It is 
           recommended that this option be used when using ARJ in batch 
           files.

           Example:  ARJ a archive -+ *.*

           The "-+" option can now be used to specify an environment
           variable name to use in place of the default "ARJ_SW".  This
           option can only be used on the command line.

           Example:  ARJ a archive -+ARJ_SW2

        @: set 1 token per response file line

           This switch sets ARJ to enable/disable the interpretation of
           text lines in an ARJ RESPONSE file as a complete single token.
           Normally, in an ARJ response file, blanks are interpreted as
           token separators.  (Tokens are commands, filenames, wildcards,
           and switch options).  However, if ARJ scans an "-@" option in a
           response file, it will process subsequent text lines as single
           tokens per line.  A subsequent "-@" option will revert ARJ to
           normal multiple tokens per line mode.

           Example:  ARJ @text.rsp

           TEXT.RSP contains:
           a c:\dir\archive -r -jt1 -@ -a1
           c:\long directory name\*.*
           c:\other directory name\*.*
           -@
           dir1\*.* dir2\*.* dir3\*.*

           One common error when using the "-@" option is including extraneous
           leading and/or trailing blanks.  For example, ARJ will abort with
           an invalid switch option error if the second "-@" above has one or
           more trailing blanks.

        &: install critical error handler

           By default, ARJ sets up a default interactive critical error
           handler to handle errors like "sector not found" and "drive not
           ready".  The user has the option of retrying the failed
           operation.  The user can press Control BREAK to abort to DOS.

           The "-&" option sets ARJ to install a non-interactive critical
           error handler.  This is designed for unattended ARJ use.  This
           handler will intercept errors that produce the "Abort, Retry ...."
           error messages like bad sector errors and file sharing
           violations.  It can be specified on the command line or via the
           environment variable.  Please note that if you specify "-&" on
           the command line, the handler is installed immediately before any
           files are processed.  If you specify "-&" in the environment, ARJ
           will not install the handler until all switches are processed.

        !: set list char

           This option allows the user to set the character used for list
           files.  The option "-!" with no specified character toggles
           (turns off) the current list file character (default "!").

           Syntax:  ARJ a archive -!@ @list.fil
                    ARJ a archive -! !.bat

           The first example above sets the list file character to the one
           used by LHA and PKZIP.

        $: add/extract volume label

           This option allows the user to store or extract DOS volume
           labels in ARJ archives.  It is possible to have multiple labels
           in one archive.  At ARJ 2.10 and above, you can only add or
           extract volumes labels at DOS 2.0 and above.  The "-$" option
           may be specified with or without a drive specification.  The
           drive can be specified by appending the letter and optionally
           the ":" to "-$".  If none is specified, ARJ assumes the current
           drive unless a specified target base directory has a drive
           specification.

           WARNING:  Currently, ARJ allows more than one volume label and
           duplicate volume labels in the same archive.  You can delete one
           or more duplicate labels with the "ARJ d -q archive label"
           command.  ARJ will query you on each occurrence of "label".
           This "faulty" mechanism allows a file and label of the same name
           to be added to an archive.  The capability of having duplicate
           labels in the same archive MAY NOT be present in future versions
           of ARJ.

           The SFX and SFXJR modules DO NOT support volume label extraction!
           The SFXV modules DOES.

           On the list screen, volume labels will be indicated by the "V"
           under the "T" column.

           Syntax:  ARJ a archive -$           add all files and the label
                                               of the current drive.
                    ARJ a archive ... -$B      add only the label of drive B
                    ARJ a archive ... -$B:     add only the label of drive B
                    ARJ u archive ... -$B:     add only the label of drive B

           To extract volume labels, you must select the label by setting
           "-$" and specifying a matching wildname/filename.

           Syntax:  ARJ e archive doslabel -$  extract the label named
                                               doslabel to the current drive.
                    ARJ e archive -$D:         extract all files to the
                                               current drive and extract the
                                               label to drive D:.
                    ARJ e archive label B:\ -$ extract all files to B:\ and
                                               the label to drive B.

           ARJ will display all labels over 8 characters with a "." in it
           like a normal DOS filename.  However, ARJ will not restore this
           extra "." when extracting.  ARJ will only create standard
           uppercase DOS volume labels.

           Volume labels created by utilities other than standard DOS
           commands like LABEL and FORMAT may cause label access problems
           for ARJ.  For example, Norton's VL.EXE can create labels with
           lowercase letters.  You will need to use LABEL.COM to delete
           these labels in order to let ARJ set a new label.  Programs that
           delete unusual labels must do absolute writes to disk or use a
           wildcard ("*.*") delete of files with the label attribute in the
           root directory.  A single bit corruption in the program can
           result in the deletion of ALL files in the root.  ARJ currently
           chooses not to take that risk.

        #: select files by order number

           The "-#" option allows the user to select files from an archive
           by their order number in the archive.  For example, the number 1
           selects the first file in the archive.  This option is useful in
           selecting files where there are duplicates in the archive.  It
           is also useful for batch type utilities that need to extract
           files sequentially from an archive for processing.  Archive menu
           programs should find this option very useful in processing
           archives with duplicate filenames.

           You can specify a series of files with the n1-n8 type syntax.
           No embedded spaces are allowed.

           ARJ e archive -# 1 4 12-25 40-100

           NOTE that the order number starts from 1 for each individual
           archive including multiple volume archives.  In other words, the
           first file in archive.a04 is number 1.

           Do NOT mix filenames with the numbers other than the base
           directory.

           Example:  ARJ e -# archive basedir\ 1 3 5 20 21

           For consistency, ARJ now interprets the file spec "10-" as 10
           to the end of the archive.

           Example:  ARJ l archive -# 21000-       means file 21000 to end

        a: allow any file Attribute

           By default ARJ will not select system or hidden files via
           wildcarding unless the "-a" option is specified.

           The "-a1" switch sets ARJ to add any directories in the selected
           set of matching filespecs to the archive being built.  This
           switch also selects hidden and system files as in the "-a"
           switch.  Even empty directories will be added.  The "l" command
           will display such directories with a "D" under the "T" (file
           type) header.

           Older releases of ARJ will skip over empty directory entries.
           The ARJSFX and ARJSFXJR modules CAN process empty directory
           entries.

           This option is useful for saving software directories with
           needed empty directories.

           See the "-hb" option for a newer way of selecting files.

        b: Backup changed files

           The "-b" switch will select only files that have the archive bit
           set.  It will NOT reset archive bits.

           Example:  arj a a:backup c:\*.* -b -r -va   simulates FULL BACKUP

           See "-hb" option for other options.

       b1: Backup changed files and reset archive bits

           If you specify the "-b1" option, files with the archive bit set
           will be selected AND the archive bits of all archived files will
           be reset after a successful archive has been built.

           Example:  arj a a:backup c:\*.* -b1 -r -va   simulates BACKUP

           Under Windows 9x, the use of the "-b" type switch options to
           reset the archive bit may result in a sharing violation error.
           ARJ will display the error and then proceed ignoring the error.

       b2: Only reset archive bits

           The "-b2" switch does NOT affect file selection.  It does cause
           ARJ to reset the archive bits of added files.  If the "-f" or
           "-u" option has been selected, ARJ will also reset the archive
           bits of files that are already duplicated in the archive.

           Example:  arj a e:archive c:\*.* -b2 -r    archives all files on
           the C drive and resets all archive bits.

       b3: reset archive bit during restore

           The "-b3" switch is used to reset the archive bits of files
           being extracted.  It is useful for setting the archive state so
           that a subsequent incremental backup will not backup these
           extracted files.

       b4: do not restore file attributes and reset archive bit

           The "-b4" switch is used to set ARJ to NOT restore any file
           attribute bits and to reset the archive bit of files being
           extracted.

           It is useful for easing the cleanup/deletion of temporarily
           extracted archive files as in a virus scanning process.  Files
           will NOT be restored as system, hidden, or readonly.

       b5: do not restore any file attributes

           The "-b5" switch is used to set ARJ to NOT restore any file
           attribute bits and to allow the archive bit to stay set of
           files being extracted.

        c: skip time-stamp Check

           Normally with the "u" and "f" commands, ARJ will only update
           newer files to an archiver.  The "-c" switch will set ARJ to
           update the archive regardless of the date-time modified time
           stamps.

           When extracting files from an archive with the "-y" and "-f"
           switches set, ARJ would normally skip extracting older files.
           The "-c" switch will set ARJ to extract these older files.

        d: with Delete (move)

           This switch provides the standard MOVE command.  Successfully
           added files will be deleted.  When used with the "-f" or "-u"
           option, ARJ will also delete files that are already duplicated
           in the archive.  ARJ will prompt the user before deleting the
           files unless the "-y" switch is specified.  Also, you can use
           the "m" command which does not prompt before deleting the files.
           At ARJ 2.30 and above, when using the "-a1" to specify the
           selection of directories, ARJ will also delete the selected
           directories.

           ARJ a archive filename -d -y       is equivalent to

           ARJ m archive filename             and

           ARJ a archive filename
           delete filename

           The ARJ e and ARJ x commands now accept the "-d" option to
           provide an extract and delete option.  This feature requires
           that you specify the files to extract and delete.

           ARJ e archive -d file1 file2

           Chapter archives do NOT support extraction with deletion.

        e: Exclude paths from filenames

           By default ARJ always stores the pathname of the archived file.
           This switch will set ARJ to store only the filename component.

           The "-e1" switch option sets ARJ to NOT store the base directory
           name with the filenames in the archive.

           Example:  ARJ a archive C:\SOFTWARE\ARJ\ *.* -r -e1

           In the above example, ARJ will NOT store the C:\SOFTWARE\ARJ\ as
           part of the filenames.

           When updating files within an archive, ARJ uses the full
           pathname to match against the full name of the selected files.
           The "-e" and "-e1" option affect this exact matching.  If "-e"
           is specified, only the filespecs of the selected files will be
           matched against the full pathname of the files in the archive.
           If "-e1" is specified, the full pathname minus the base
           directory of the selected files is used to match against the
           full pathname of the files in the archive.

           In other words, ARJ will only update a file within an archive if
           the name of the new file as stored in the archive would be
           identical to the name of the original file stored in the
           archive.

           This switch used during extraction will exclude the beginning
           characters of the filename.  This can be useful for shortening a
           long output pathname.

           Examples:  ARJ x archive -e10  will exclude the first 10
                                          characters of the output name.

                      ARJ x archive -e4   will exclude the first 4
                                          characters.

        f: Freshen existing files

           This switch used with the "e" or "x" commands sets ARJ to only
           extract newer files from the archive.

           This switch used with the "m" command sets ARJ to update only
           input files with newer dates than the ones in the archive.
           After the archive has been updated, all updated selected files
           and all up to date selected files will be deleted.

           The ARJ m -f command is very similar to the LHARC m command.

       f1: Freshen existing files (OLDER)

           This switch used with the "e" or "x" commands sets ARJ to only
           extract OLDER files from the archive or to add OLDER files to
           the archive.

       f2: Freshen different files

           This switch used with the "e" and "x" commands causes ARJ to
           add/extract CHANGED (different date-time or different size).

           There is a slight limitation to this switch.  When processing
           files that are split across volumes, the size test is skipped
           and the file is updated regardless.

       f3: Freshen files that are CRC mismatches

           This switch is used to select files that are CRC mismatches or
           different sizes for extracting or adding.  The 32 bit CRC
           (checksum) of the file is matched against the CRC of the file in
           the archive.

           There is a slight limitation to this switch.  When processing
           files that are split across volumes, the CRC test is skipped
           and the file is updated regardless.

        g: Garble with password

           This switch followed by a password "-gpassword" will encrypt or
           decrypt an archived file.  During a "l" or "v" command, a
           garbled file will display a "G" after the method number.

           Example:  ARJ e archive -gpassword

           If the "-g" option is followed by a question mark "?", ARJ will
           prompt the user for the password without displaying the password
           input.  The backspace key can be used to erase characters.

           Example:  ARJ a archive -g?

           Using the wrong password during extraction will result in a
           "Bad file data" or "CRC error" error message.

           Use the "g" command to garble an already existing ARJ archive.

           Please save your password in a safe place.  It may be nearly
           impossible to retrieve your garbled files if you forget your
           password.  There is NO TRICK to recovering a lost password.

           The garble option in this version of ARJ has three versions. One
           is the original version found in earlier ARJ releases.  It is
           compatible with older versions and works like those versions.

           The second garble version uses a separate encryption module.

           This version of ARJ provides a new encryption scheme based upon
           the Russian encryption algorithm (GOST 28147-89 cipher).  This
           algorithm is similar in design to DES; however, GOST is designed
           for software implementation.  GOST 28147-89 uses a 256 bit key
           and 32 rounds of encryption.  This implementation uses the 64
           bit cipher feedback mode.

           This new option is accessed by using the new "-hg" option.  This
           option sets ARJ to use the separate encryption module to encrypt
           the data.  By default, ARJ will look for the file "ARJCRYPT.COM"
           in the same directory where the ARJ.EXE being executed is found.
           The user may specify the pathname of the module to use.

           Examples:  ARJ a archive *.doc -gThis_is_a_password -hg
                      ARJ a archive *.doc -gpassword -hgc:\dir\enc.com

           This separate module feature has the advantage of saving space
           with the ARJSFXV module and the DEARJ.EXE module when encryption
           is not needed.  You simply do not include the encryption module
           in the archive when not using encryption.

           The encryption overlay module is not included with this version 
           of ARJ.  Because of USA export regulations, ARJ Software, Inc 
           may not export the encryption overlay module from the USA.  It 
           is available on the ARJ website for USA users only.

           The new garble option accepts a password key up to 64 characters 
           long.  Excess characters are ignored.  Garble passwords ARE CASE 
           SENSITIVE!  
           
           If you need compatibility with ARJ 2.60 "-hg" encryption, you 
           must limit your passwords to 32 characters or less.

           DO NOT LOSE your password!  There is no known method to recover 
           the password other than by brute force, which could take a very 
           long time.  The longer the password, the longer it would take 
           to "guess" it.  ARJ Software, Inc. cannot provide help in 
           finding lost passwords.

           This new encryption scheme is not compatible with the "-g"
           option of pre-2.55 versions of ARJ.  If you want to maintain
           compatibility with pre-2.55 versions of ARJ, you should NOT use
           the "-hg" option.

           Only the multiple volume self-extractor supports the new
           encryption module.

           A variation of the "-hg" option is "-hg!".  This "-hg!" option
           accesses a built-in version of GOST that is limited to a 40 bit
           key size.  Only the first 32 characters of a user password are
           accepted and crunched into a 40 bit key.  This algorithm is 
           designed to meet USA encryption export rules.  Of the 
           self-extractors, only the multiple volume self-extractor 
           supports "-hg!".

           When garbling or ungarbling an existing archive, ARJ will detect
           the method of encryption previously used and select that same
           method regardless of whether the "-hg" option is specified or
           not.

        i: with no progress Indicator

           Do not display the percentage progress indicator.  The progress
           indicator appears during the add, extract, search, and test
           operations.

           The "-i1" option provides a bar type graphical progress
           indicator for the compression, extraction, and testing type
           commands of ARJ.  This provides an alternative to the simple
           numeric increasing percentage progress indicator.

           The "-i2" option provides a combined percentage and bar progress
           display.

           The "-i3" switch shows the percentage progress of the WHOLE
           archive build. This switch is only operative during adds.

           The "-i4" switch shows the percentage progress as a bar graph of
           the WHOLE archive build. This switch is only operative during
           adds.

           The "-i5" switch shows the percentage progress including a bar
           graph of the WHOLE archive build. This switch is only operative
           during adds.

           The "-i6" switch shows the percentage progress of the WHOLE
           archive build along with a progress bar graph for the current
           file. This switch is only operative during adds.

        j: selects alternate set of switch characters.

           This switch toggles the set of switch characters.  The toggle is
           reset at end at of each separate switch sequence back to the
           main set of switch characters.

           For example, "-ja" is not the same function as "-a".  However,
           "-jja" is the same as "-a" because of the double toggle.  Also,
           "-jaje" is NOT the same as "-ja -je".  The switch sequence
           "-jae" is the same as "-ja -je".

        k: Keep a .BAK of ARJ archive

           Create a ".BAK" of the original archive file during an update.
           The original archive will be suffixed with ".BAK".  Any existing
           ".BAK" file will be overwritten.

           This has no relation to "backup type" ARJ archives.

        l: create List_name file

           This switch will set ARJ to dump to the filename specified after
           the "-l" switch all of the filenames to be processed by this ARJ
           command.  For add type commands, this list contains all files
           that matched the file wildnames given on the command line.  For
           other commands, the file will contain only the original
           filenames and/or wildcard names.  Other options do NOT affect
           the output of filenames to this list file.  To get an index file
           for backup purposes, use the "-ji" option.

           This list file can be used as a listfile on the command line.

           Example:  ARJ a -lname.lst archive *.exe

           This example will create a file named "name.lst" with all *.exe
           files.

        m: with Method 0, 1, 2, 3, 4

           Method 0 = storing   (no compression)
           Method 1 = best compression for general use
                                (default compression method)
                                (requires 300,000 plus bytes memory)
           Method 2 = slightly less compression and faster
                                (requires 282,000 plus bytes memory)
           Method 3 = less compression and less memory and faster
                                (requires 250,000 plus bytes memory)
           Method 4 = fastest compression
                                (requires 235,000 plus bytes memory)

           Example:  ARJ a archive *.exe -m2

           The "-jm" option will usually improve the size reduction of
           method 1 at the cost of speed and memory.  The behavior of
           "-jm" with -m2, -m3 and -m4 is UNDEFINED.

           Method 4 uses a different decoder than 1 to 3.  Method 4 is
           almost twice as fast as method 1.

           During extraction, ARJ uses less memory than during compression.
           See the section on ARJ LIMITATIONS for more memory usage
           information.

        n: only New files (not exist)

           With the "e" or "x" commands, extract files that do not exist in
           the target directory.

           With the "a" or "m" commands, archive files that do not exist in
           the target archive.

           With the "d" or "l" commands, specify files that do not exist in
           the target directory.

        o: On or after date YYMMDDHHMMSS or YYYYMMDDHHMMSS

           The switch "-o" by itself means select files modified today.  If
           "-o" is followed by a date and optionally a time, ARJ will only
           select files modified on or after that date-time.

           Year specifications come in three variations to provide backward
           compatibility and year 2000 compliance.

           Year specifications that begin with "80" to "99" are interpreted
           as the years 1980 to 1999.

           Example:  ARJ a test -o9001021700   -> select files modified
           on or after Jan 2, 1990, 5:00 PM.

           Year specifications that begin with "19", "20", or "21" are 
           interpreted as FOUR digit year numbers.

           Example:  ARJ a test -o20020101     -> select files modified 
           on or after Jan 1, 2002, 12:00 AM.

           Year specifications that begin with "00" to "18" are interpreted
           as the years 2000 to 2018.

           Example:  ARJ a test -o1001021700   -> select files modified
           on or after Jan 2, 2010, 5:00 PM.

           There is no option for using other date-time formats.

           The switch "-ob" selects files modified before today.  If "-ob"
           is followed by a date and optionally a time, ARJ will only
           select files modified before that date-time.

           ARJ now accepts the use of "-o" and "-ob" options simultaneously
           to specify a range of selected dates.  This is useful for
           selecting files on a specific date.

           Example:  ARJ a archive *.* -o910101 -ob910102

           The "-o" option and/or the "-ob" option will default to today's
           date at midnight (0000 hrs) when specified without dates.

           The "-od" and "-odb" switches allow the user to select files 
           based upon the number of days from today.  The "-odb" switch 
           allows the user to select files modified before the specified 
           number of days from today.  You CAN combine the "-od" and "-odb" 
           switches. The days are calculated from midnight.

           Examples:  ARJ a archive -od0    select files modified today
                      ARJ a archive -od1    select files modified yesterday
                                            and today
                      ARJ a archive -odb1   select files modified before
                                            yesterday

       oa: Accessed on or after date YYMMDDHHMMSS or YYYYMMDDHHMMSS

           The "-oa" and "-oab" switches allow the user to select files 
           under Windows 9x based upon file date-time last accessed.  "-oa" 
           selects files after the date value, "-oab" selects files before.

           This ARJ version does NOT support combining "-o", "-oa", "-oc" 
           with one another.  You CAN combine "-oa" with "-oab".

       oc: Created on or after date YYMMDDHHMMSS or YYYYMMDDHHMMSS 

           The "-oc" and "-ocb" switches allow the user to select files 
           under Windows 9x based upon file date-time created.  "-oc" 
           selects files after the date value, "-ocb" selects files before.
        
        p: match using full Pathnames

           When "-p" is specified, ARJ looks for an exact pathname match.
           This can be modified by the "-e" option.

           For non-update commands and specified filenames with paths, ARJ
           will match the full path with or without the "-p" switch.

           To match directory paths that contain subdirectories, you should
           use the "-p1" switch.  This switch sets ARJ to match only the
           initial portion of the pathnames against the wildnames
           specified.  For example, if your archive contains the TURBOC++
           directory named TC and you wish to extract the INCLUDE
           subdirectory along with the subdirectory INCLUDE\SYS, you can
           use the following command:

           ARJ e archive TC\INCLUDE\*.* -p1

           If you wanted to extract all of the INCLUDE\S*.* files including
           the contents of the SYS subdirectory, you can use the following
           command:

           ARJ e archive TC\INCLUDE\S*.* -p1

        q: Query on each file

           This switch causes ARJ to prompt the user prior to acting upon
           each archived file for all but the "j", "l", "t", "v", and "w"
           commands.  This allows you selectively to delete, add, etc.

           Note: As of ARJ 2.75a and ARJ32 3.08a, ARJ will no longer query
           for subsequent portions of a file split across volumes.
        
        r: Recurse subdirectories

           This switch will set ARJ to recurse any wildcards specified on
           the command line including ARJ archive filenames by traversing
           all subdirectories scanning for matches.

           ARJ will also recurse non-wildcard filenames as in:
           ARJ a archive FILE.BBS -r

        s: set archive time-Stamp

           This switch causes ARJ to set the date-time stamp of the archive
           to that of the newest file in the archive.

           This option will also work with non-update commands as in:
           ARJ l archive -s ....

           The "-s1" switch is used to keep the old archive date-time
           stamp.  The new archive will have the same timestamp as the
           original archive.

           The "-s2" switch is like the "-s" switch except that it only
           works for archive modification commands.  This makes it more
           suitable for use in the ARJ_SW environment variable.

           The "-s3" switch sets ARJ to keep both the original archive file
           time-stamp as well as the original internal archive modified
           time-stamp when modifying the archive.

        t: set file Type

           This switch causes ARJ to open and read the file to be archived
           in binary or text mode.  The default is binary mode (-t0).  To
           archive in text mode, use the -t1 switch.  The "-t" switch is
           equivalent to "-t0".

           If you specify the switch "-t0", ARJ will always use the binary
           mode even for freshening text mode files already in the archive.

           The file type "text" is only needed for future cross platform
           transfers of ARJ archives.  It enables ARJ to extract text files
           to the host file system with the text newline sequence that is
           correct for that operating system.

           However, this mode may produce slightly better size reduction.
           The "-t1" option combined with "-jh65000" can produce some of
           the best size reduction numbers.  Extraction of files compressed
           in text mode is slower than the extraction of binary files.

           You should NOT use the "-t1" switch while archiving in multiple
           volume mode.

           ****************************************************************

           DO NOT USE THE TEXT MODE ON NON-TEXT FILES!!!  Word processor
           format files are NOT TEXT FILES!  Text files are files like
           those created by EDLIN, EDIT, QEDIT, NOTEPAD, and BRIEF.  On
           non-text files ARJ will prematurely stop input if it finds an
           embedded EOF character (CTL Z).  This will produce a LOSS of
           data on binary files.  As of ARJ 2.30 and UNARJ 2.30, ARJ will
           extract text mode data in 8-bit format when extracted to the
           original type of platform. Only when the text file is extracted
           to a different type of platform will the 8-bit text be stripped
           to 7-bit text.

           ****************************************************************

           In "-t1" text mode, ARJ will look at the first 4096 bytes of the
           input file looking for non-text characters.  In "-t1g" text with
           graphics mode, ARJ will look at the first 4096 bytes of the
           input file looking for too many byte values over hex 7F.  If ARJ
           finds either condition it will automatically backtrack and
           switch to "-t0" (default) binary mode for that particular file.
           In addition at the end of compressing the input file, if ARJ
           finds that the input file size is not greater than 80 percent of
           the binary file size (size on disk), ARJ will backtrack and
           re-archive that file in binary mode.  This should help to avoid
           the problem of accidentally compressing executable files with
           the "-t1" option which results in lost data.  These tests are
           not foolproof.

           The original file size reported by the "l" and "v" commands is
           the actual number of bytes input during text mode compression.
           This is usually the MS-DOS file size minus the number of
           carriage returns in the file, since C text mode strips a file of
           carriage returns.  There can be problems with the file size
           because compressing in TEXT mode can be LOSSY (unnecessary
           characters may be lost).  This can cause problems for some
           archive conversion programs that check file sizes.

           The "-t" option has been modified to allow setting file type by
           suffix similar to "-js" option.  If you want to set the file type
           to text mode for .ASM and .C files, you would specify the option
           "-t1.asm.c".

           ARJ a archive *.* -t1.asm.c.h.doc
           ARJ a archive *.* -t1g.txt.doc

           Note that in the switch sequence "-t1f -t1f.doc.asm", the second
           switch does not override the first switch which specifies that
           all files are to archived in text mode.

           If you want to specify the binary file type by suffix, you must
           specify the default file type to text and then specify the type
           by suffix, because the default file type is normally binary.

           ARJ a archive *.* -t1 -t0.com.exe.obj

           Because of the way ARJ checks all files to be archived in text
           mode, some true text files will not pass the test.  In this
           case, you can specify the "f" modifier to force text mode.  This
           modifier can be combined with the "-t1." suffix option.  The "f"
           modifier must follow the "g" modifier if any.

           ARJ a archive *.bat -t1f
           ARJ a archive *.txt -t1gf
           ARJ a archive *.* -t1f.bat.asm.doc

           One trick that you can do with the -t1 option is to convert UNIX
           text files to MS-DOS text files.  If you have extracted the
           files out of the ZOO 2.10 archive and need to convert the
           linefeeds to carriage return/linefeed, you can use the following
           commands:

           ARJ a archive *.* -m0 -t1
           ARJ e archive *.* -y

        u: Update files (new and newer)

           This switch used with the "e" and "x" commands causes ARJ to
           extract newer and non-existing files.

           This switch used with the "m" command causes ARJ to update only
           input files with newer dates than the ones in the archive and
           add new files to the archive.  After the archive has been
           updated, all added files and updated selected files and all up
           to date selected files will be deleted.

       u1: Update files (non-existing and OLDER)

           This switch used with the "e" and "x" commands causes ARJ to
           extract OLDER and non-existing files from an archive or to add
           OLDER and non-existing files to an archive.

       u2: Update different files

           This switch used with the "e" and "x" commands causes ARJ to
           add/extract CHANGED (different date-time or different size) and
           non-existing files.

           There is a slight limitation to this switch.  When processing
           files that are split across volumes, the size test is skipped
           and the file is updated regardless.

       u3: Update CRC mismatched files

           This switch is used to select files that are CRC mismatches or
           NEW for extracting or adding.  The 32 bit CRC (checksum) of the
           file is matched against the CRC of the file in the archive.

           There is a slight limitation to this switch.  When processing
           files that are split across volumes, the CRC test is skipped
           and the file is updated regardless.

        v: enable multiple Volumes

           This switch is required to put ARJ into multiple volume mode.

           This switch allows the creation of multiple volumes in the ADD
           mode.  The command "arj a a:arjvol \*.* -b -r -v360000" allows 
           a user to backup up all files changed since the last backup to
           multiple floppy disks.  ARJ will pause between volumes to allow
           changing disks.  The volume filenames will be suffixed .ARJ, 
           .A01, .A02, .A03, .... , .A99, .100, .101, .102, and so on up 
           to .999 for a thousand volumes.  Before this release, the 
           volumes would overlap after volumes .A99 and .A00.  You can 
           start the volume series at .A01 or .001 by specifying the full 
           name of the starting archive as "name.A01" or "name.001".

           Example:  ARJ a a:archive.a01 -v
                     ARJ a a:archive.001 -v
           
           After the pause to change diskettes, ARJ will check to make sure
           that the diskette has been changed.  However, this check is
           limited to 3 retries for the same volume.  This test can be
           inhibited with the "i" modifier.

           Example:  ARJ x a:archive -vi

           Archived files can be split across volumes.  ARJ will try to
           fill each volume to within 200 to 1000 bytes of the specified
           maximum size.

           The modifier "w" specifies to ARJ that files are NOT to be split
           across volumes except for one case.  That case is where the
           archived file would not fit in ONE whole volume.  This feature
           does not optimize the use of space in these type of volumes.
           With this feature, it is possible to have a volume of only 100
           or less bytes.

           The command "arj x a:arjvol -v" would restore files starting
           from arjvol.arj.  You must specify the entire ARJ volume name
           including the .Ann suffix when starting from the middle of a
           series of volumes or when the series starts with ".A01" or
           ".000", etc.
           
           The global "-y" option will disable the next volume prompt for
           multiple volume archives EXCEPT when the archives are located
           on removable media.  The "-jyv" option will disable the next
           volume prompt even when using removable media.

           At DOS versions before 3.0, only drives A and B are considered
           removable.

           ARJ x a:arjvol -v -jyco

           The above example extracts in multiple volume mode and
           suppresses prompting for permission to create directories and to
           overwrite existing files.  ARJ will assume yes in these cases.

           Because of the splitting process, archived split files with a
           size of zero bytes are possible.  This is not an error.

           If you comment your archives with long comments, you should take
           that into account when specifying volume size.  You should
           specify a smaller volume size during the "a" command before
           adding the comments.

           The "-v" switch will accept the abbreviations 360, 720, 1200,
           and 1440.  These will be translated to 362,000, 730,000,
           1,213,000, and 1,457,000 bytes, respectively.  Please note that
           if the available disk space is less than the requested amount,
           ARJ will prompt the user for permission to continue.

           You can use the "K" modifier as a shortcut for "000".  For
           example, 100K means 100000.  "K" does NOT mean 1024.

           ARJ will accept the "M" modifier to multiply by 1,000,000 (one
           million).

           The "-vv" switch turns on the next volume beep option.  When you
           select this option, ARJ will sound a beep prior to the next
           volume.

           The "-va" switch sets the disk space auto-detect option.  ARJ
           will check for the disk space available on the target directory
           and try to use all or most of it.  This option is aimed at
           diskette usage.  Please note that this switch option detects
           free disk space.  It does not detect formatted disk space.
           If the space available is less than 10,000 bytes, ARJ will
           prompt the user for permission to continue.  Please note that
           ARJ can support the use of diskettes formatted at higher than
           normal capacities such as 3.5 inch HD diskettes formatted at
           1.6 MB.

           Examples:  ARJ a A:backup -b -va
                      ARJ a backup -v360

           The "r" modifier allows the reservation of disk space on the
           first volume.  The number after the "r" specifies the space to
           reserve.  This is useful for software installation volumes.

           Example:  ARJ a install -v360r50K   make first volume 50000
                                               bytes smaller than 360K.

           New to ARJ 2.61 is a simple delete option "D" when creating
           volume archives.  For SAFETY REASONS, this delete option is 
           limited in scope and specification.  The exact file or files 
           (via wildcard) must be specified. A directory name is not 
           sufficient (A:\ or C:\TEMP).  A filename or wildspec is 
           required (A:\*.* or C:\TEMP\*.TXT).  In addition, this delete 
           option does not delete through (recurse) subdirectories. In 
           other words, this delete function works similar to the DOS DEL 
           command except that a filespec is required.  ARJ accepts all 
           characters after the "D" option as the filespec.

           Examples:  ARJ a a:archive -vada:\*.*
                      ARJ a testvol -v1440dtestvol.a*
           
           At ARJ release 2.71 and ARJ32 release 3.04 is an "E" option to 
           set an alternate naming scheme for multiple volume archives.  
           Instead of naming succeeding volumes with a numeric file 
           extension, ARJ can overlay the three digit numeric sequences 
           before the DOT file extension.

           Examples:  ARJ a archive -ve1440        =>
                          archive.arj, arch001.arj, arch002.arj, ....
                      ARJ a archive -je -ve1440    =>
                          archive.exe, arch001.exe, arch003.exe, ....
                      ARJ a name001 -je -ve1440    =>
                          name001.exe, name002.exe, name003.exe, ....
                                                           
           The switch modifier "s" can be used to make ARJ execute one
           specified system command prior to each volume or make ARJ pause
           for manual execution of system commands.  This is useful for
           purging target diskettes before ARJ writes to them.  Please note
           that when processing a large number of files, ARJ may not have
           enough free memory left to properly execute the system commands.

           The switch modifier "z" is identical to the "s" modifier except
           that the system command is NOT echoed to the screen.

           Optionally, after the "s" modifier, you can specify a system
           command or batch filename.  ARJ will automatically execute the
           command or batch file before each volume.  If the command has
           embedded blanks, then the entire switch option must be
           surrounded by double quotes.  The system command is executed
           before ARJ executes the auto-detect space option.

           Examples:  ARJ a A:backup -vas
                      ARJ a A:backup -vvas
                      ARJ a A:backup -v360s
                      ARJ a A:backup -vvw360s
                      ARJ a A:backup -vaspurge.bat
                      ARJ a A:backup -v360sdelete.bat
                      ARJ a A:backup -v1440da\:*.*
                      ARJ a A:backup "-vasFORMAT A:"
                      ARJ a A:backup "-vasDIR C:\ "

           Note that the last example has a space before the last double
           quote mark.  If the last space is missing, the internal command
           line parser will make the double quote mark part of the DIR
           command.

           The "-v" switch now accepts its modifiers in any order.  The "s"
           and "z" modifiers must be last because any succeeding text is
           considered the system command to execute.

           Examples:  ARJ a volume -vavw        beep, autosize, whole files
                      ARJ a volume -vavsDIR     beep, autosize, execute DIR

           Volume archives can be used as stand-alone archives for non-update
           commands except for the files that are split across volumes.

           It is recommended that the "-jt" (test archive) option be used
           with the "-v" switch to ensure perfectly built volumes as it is
           tedious to retest volumes after they are built.

           During ARJ operation in non-update commands, ARJ will not abort
           when it cannot open the correct sequential ARJ volume archive.
           It will report the open error and proceed to the "Ok to process
           the next volume?" prompt.  At this point it is possible to swap
           diskettes to put the correct volume in place.  This feature is
           disabled if the "next volume" prompt has been disabled.

           For those who have enough free hard disk space, the -v option
           can be used to make backing up the hard disk fairly easy.  ARJ
           can be set to create multiple floppy sized volumes on the hard
           disk for later copy to diskettes.  So even if ARJ is slow, you
           can fire up an ARJ backup and some time later, you can quickly
           copy the volumes to floppies.  Below are sample backup commands:

           arj a backup *.* -b2 -r -v360 -y -jt -js     full backup
           arj a backup *.* -b1 -r -v360 -y -jt -js     incremental backup

           *****************************************************************

           See the "-jn" and "-jx" options to see how to recover from an
           abort in the middle of a backup type operation.  ARJ will allow
           a restart in the middle of an aborted backup at the disk where
           the failure occurred.

           *****************************************************************

           To go along with the new CHAPTER feature, ARJ now supports the
           UPDATE of multiple volume archives.  To implement this feature
           reliably in multiple volumes, all new or changed files are added
           at the END of the LAST volume.  This re-arrangement only occurs
           with multiple volume archives.  This prevents the diskette
           overflow that would occur with earlier versions of ARJ.
           However, certain file attributes such as TEXT MODE may not be
           carried over to the updated file.

           *****************************************************************

           TIP:

           To pre-determine the number of diskettes required to archive a
           set of data, you can take advantage of the "s" option of the
           "-v" switch.  The "s" option lets you execute a DOS command
           prior to each volume.  You can specify a command that deletes
           the previously created archive volume.  This lets you use the
           same floppy diskette/hard disk space to build the multiple
           volumes.

           Example:  ARJ a a:volume -r -vada:volume.* -y c:\*.*

        w: assign Work directory

           This switch option is HIGHLY recommended if you are archiving
           directly to diskettes or if you have a sufficient RAMDISK space.

           By default, ARJ builds a new ARJ archive file in the same
           directory as the old archive file.  By specifying the "-w"
           switch, you can specify the working directory where the
           temporary archive file will be built.  After the temporary
           archive file is built, it is copied over the original one and
           deleted.

           Normally ARJ requires enough disk space for the original archive
           and the new temporary archive.  Specifying the "-w" switch
           allows you to move some of that disk space requirement to
           another directory.

           When using the "-w" switch while archiving to multiple volumes,
           ARJ will check the available disk space in the work directory.
           If there is not enough space, ARJ will prompt for permission to
           continue.  This prompt can be suppressed with the "-y" and
           "-jyk" switches.

           If the copy of the temporary archive on top of the original
           archive aborts, you will have to do the copy manually.  ARJ will
           not delete the temporary archive in this error situation. If you
           press CTL BREAK during the copy process, ARJ will delete both
           the temporary archive and the target archive unless this was a
           modification of an existing archive.

           Example:  ARJ a -we:\temp\ archive *.c

           For speed reasons, you should always use the "-w" option when
           creating or modifying archives on diskettes.  You should specify
           a work directory on your hard disk or ramdrive.

           Example:  ARJ a -we:\ b:archive *.c

        x: Exclude filenames

           This switch is used to exclude filenames or wildnames from the
           list of filenames to be processed.

           Example:  ARJ a archive soft\*.* -r -x*.exe -x*.obj -xtest

           This example will archive all files in the soft directory and
           subdirectories with the exception of any files named "test"
           or ending in ".exe" and ".obj".

           You can also specify an exclude file list by preceding the
           filename with the list character "!".  The exclude file list
           must contain a list of filenames/wildnames one per line with no
           leading or trailing blanks.

           Example:  ARJ a archive soft\*.* -r -x!exclude.lst

           You can specify a pathname to exclude as in:

           ARJ a archive \dir\*.* -r -x\dir\*.*

           In the above example, ARJ will exclude all files in \dir
           but not the subdirectories in \dir.

           The "-x" option also allows you to exclude an entire path
           including subdirectories from being selected for processing.

           Syntax:  ARJ a archive C:\*.* -xC:\TEMP\

           The "\" after C:\TEMP indicates to ARJ that everything below
           C:\TEMP\ is to be excluded.

           Note that the exclude directory option requires that the
           directory be specified in the same relative path that the
           selected files use.

           Example:

           arj a archive \temp\*.* -x\temp\firstdir     is correct usage
           arj a archive \temp\*.* -xC:\temp\firstdir   is NOT correct because
                                                        of the C:

           The "-x" switch also works for non-update commands like
           "e"xtract and "l"ist.

           Examples:

           arj e archive -x*.exe           extract all files except *.exe files
           arj l archive -x*.exe -x*.obj   list all files except *.exe and *.obj

           A maximum of 8000 filenames or wildnames can be excluded.

           Note that the "-x" option is unaffected by the "-p" option.

        y: assume Yes on all queries

           Use this switch for batch type uses of ARJ.  This switch
           disables most of the normal user queries during ARJ execution.
           Use this switch to suppress overwrite queries in the "e" and "x"
           commands, to suppress the make new directory query in the "e"
           and "x" commands, to suppress the new filename prompt when an
           open file operation fails in the "e" and "x" commands, to
           suppress the pause during the "s" command and to suppress the
           next volume pause using the "-v" option to create volumes on the
           hard disk.

           The "-y" switch will NOT suppress the "-v" next volume prompt
           when the archive is located on a drive with removable media
           such as a diskette drive.

           Use this option with due caution, especially during extraction
           as this sets ARJ to overwrite files.  However, the "-n" option
           can be used to avoid any overwriting.

           As an alternative, you can use the "-jy" option which lets you
           suppress individual types of user queries.

        z: supply file for archive comment

           The "-z" switch has been provided to facilitate batch commenting
           of ARJ archives with the "c" command.  When the "-z" option has
           been specified with or without a comment file, ARJ will only
           process the archive header comment and will skip any file
           commenting unless the "-jz" switch has been specified.

           A comment file containing only a single blank can be used to
           erase comments from ARJ archives.

           Syntax:  arj c archive -z
                    arj c archive -zcomment.txt
                    arj a archive -zcomment.txt

           The "-z" option also allows one to dump the ARJ archive header
           comment to a file.  This will only extract the main archive
           comment and not the individual file comments.

           Syntax:  arj e archive ... -zcomment.txt  dumps only the comment
                    arj x archive -zcomment.txt      dumps comment and files

       j#: store only the file CRC and not the file contents

           This switch allows the building and testing of a special ARJ
           "HOLLOW" archive that is missing the actual compressed file
           contents.  This allows the creation of small archives for CRC
           testing against the CRCs of actual files.  This is suited for
           special applications. Please take note that NO actual file data
           can be extracted from these "HOLLOW" archives.

           For example, a user has transported a directory of files from
           one PC to another PC.  At a later time, that user would like to
           determine which files have actually changed their contents
           regardless of the date-time stamps.  That user could archive the
           original directory using the -j# switch which builds the ARJ
           "hollow" archive with the sole exception that no compressed data
           is stored with the archive.  This allows the rapid building of a
           much smaller archive.  The file CRC is computed and stored in
           the archive.  This new "hollow" archive is transported to the
           other PC. A simple ARJ test command with the "-jt1" option on
           the other PC would point out files whose content's CRC do not
           match.

           Another use of this "hollow" archive is for FILE INTEGRITY
           checking.  You can create this "hollow" CRC archive and use it
           at a later time to determine if any files have been corrupted or
           damaged by VIRUS or system problems.

           Please note that there is a VERY SMALL possibility that a file
           has been changed and its new 32 bit CRC still matches.  That
           possibility is approximately one in four billion.

           The -j# option during an ARJ archive build will set the
           compression method to 9.  The only change is that the file
           header will indicate that the compressed file size is ZERO.
           Otherwise, the file header is the same as in an archive where
           the file was actually compressed and stored.

           To use this "hollow" archive to test CRCs against actual file
           CRCs, use the following syntax:

           Syntax:  ARJ t archive_name -jt1
                    ARJ t archive_name target_dir\ -jt1

           The second command above is used where the relative pathnames
           stored in the archive do not match up with the current
           directory. See the discussion in ARJ.TXT for more information on
           the option "-jt".

           When ARJ displays "NOT matched" for a "hollow" archive, it means
           the file size in the archive and the size of the actual file do
           NOT match.

      j#1: do not store file data or file CRC

           This option differs from the "-j#" option in that the 32 bit CRC
           is NOT stored.  The compression method is set to 8.

      j#2: restore file attributes

           This switch will set ARJ to restore the file attributes to the
           selected files.  No file will be extracted.  Archives created
           with the "-j#" and "-j#1" options can also be used.

      j#3: restore file dates

           This switch will set ARJ to restore the file dates (written,
           accessed, created) to the selected files.  No file will be
           extracted.

      j#4: restore file attributes and dates

           This switch will set ARJ to restore the file attributes and the
           file dates (written, accessed, created) to the selected files.  
           No file will be extracted.

       j$: do not process file DTA and DTC

           This switch will set ARJ to NOT save the file properties 
           date-time accessed and date-time created.  This will save 
           header size and result in a slightly smaller archive.  During 
           extraction, this switch will set ARJ to NOT restore the file 
           properties date-time accessed and date-time created.

       ja: show ANSI comments

           This switch has acquired NEW functionality.  Its OLD function
           was to set ARJ to fully display ANSI escape sequences.  It now
           is used with the "ARJ p" command to display files using ARJ's
           own ANSI display handler.  ANSI.SYS is no longer needed.

           Example:  ARJ p ansifile -ja -q

      ja1: inhibit the display of the archive comment

           The "-ja1" switch will suppress the display of the archive
           comment.

       jb: set archive Backup type

           This switch sets ARJ to build a chapter archive.  Once an
           archive is set to a chapter archive, all subsequent processing
           will continue to treat it as a chapter archive.

           The advantage of a chapter archive over a series of separate
           archives of the same set of files is that space can be saved
           when archived files do not change.  A single chapter archive can
           produce the same results as one hundred standard archive
           backups.  In other words, one can update a chapter archive one
           hundred times and fully recover any one of those updates.

           Technically speaking, each file in a chapter archive has a
           chapter lifespan range.  When a file is backed up and has not
           changed since the last backup, only the lifespan range is
           changed.  A copy of the file is NOT added to the archive since a
           copy already exists in the archive.  If the backed up file is
           different from the previous version, then that file is added to
           the archive with an appropriate chapter range. The previous
           version of the file is still kept in the chapter archive.  When
           a particular chapter is restored, ARJ selects only the files
           whose lifespan includes the chapter number requested.

           As an example, suppose one made a series of daily chapter
           backups of a document directory where only one document out of
           the one hundred documents changes on a daily basis.  The chapter
           archive would contain the original one hundred documents plus a
           copy of each day's changed document.

           When processing chapter archives, all ARJ add type commands
           (A,M,F,U) will create a new chapter in the chapter archive.  Up
           to a maximum of 250 chapters can be stored in a single archive.
           The proper way to build and update a chapter archive is with the
           "ac" command.  You should use the same command line arguments
           for each chapter update.  If you fail to select the same files
           as before, the chapter archive will not update the lifespan
           ranges properly and those unselected files will "appear" to have
           been deleted for the current chapter.  By default, the "ac"
           command will update a chapter archive with files that are
           DIFFERENT from the previous chapter (different size or date-time
           stamp).  The "ac" command is actually an abbreviation for the
           following command and options: "u -u2 -jb", so you CANNOT use
           the "-u" or "-jb" options with the "ac" command.

           ARJ ac archive dir\  *.txt *.doc *.wri      initial build
           ARJ ac archive dir\  *.txt *.doc *.wri      second chapter
           ARJ ac archive dir\  *.txt *.doc *.wri      third chapter
           ARJ ac archive dir\  *.txt *.doc *.wri      fourth chapter
           ARJ ac archive dir\  *.txt *.doc            fifth chapter will
                                                    be missing all *.wri files

           An expert with ARJ may want to use the actual commands and
           switches instead of the "ac" command.

           ARJ u -u2 -jb archive dir\ *.txt

           It is possible to change a standard ARJ archive to a chapter
           archive with the "y" command and the "-jb" option.  The opposite
           is possible with the "-jb0" option.

           ARJ y archive -jb      converts archive to chapter archive
           ARJ y archive -jb0     converts chapter archive to standard archive

           The "cc" command is an abbreviation for the "y -jb" option.

           ARJ cc archive

           You can restore a specific chapter as in:

           ARJ x archive -jb10    restores chapter 10
           ARJ x archive -jb20    restores chapter 20

           You can restore a range of chapters as in:

           ARJ x archive -jb2-5   extracts chapters 2 to 5
           ARJ x archive -jb2-    extracts chapters 2 to the last chapter

           Please note that when restoring a range of chapters, ARJ will
           segregate each chapter's set of files in a numbered directory
           based upon the chapter number.  Files whose lifespans range over
           a series of chapters will be located in the first of that
           series.

           This feature is useful for looking over the changes that have
           occurred over a series of chapters.

           You can list a specific chapter or chapter range as in:

           ARJ l archive -jb10    lists chapter 10
           ARJ l archive -jb2-5   lists chapters 2 to 5
           ARJ l archive -jb2-    lists chapters 2 to the last chapter
           ARJ l archive          lists the most recent chapter

           You can see the chapter ranges for each file in the archive with
           the following command:

           ARJ l archive -jb* -jv

           When ARJ tries to modify a chapter archive that already has 250
           chapters in it, ARJ will return a DOS errorlevel of 12.  A batch
           program can take subsequent action by changing the name of the
           chapter archive to a backup name and then re-executing the
           failed ARJ command.

           To start all over again with a chapter archive, you can purge
           all of the previous chapters, convert the archive to a standard
           archive, and then back to an archive chapter.

           Example:  ARJ k archive *.*
                     ARJ y archive -jb0
                     ARJ d archive *.* -hbc       remove chapter labels
                     ARJ cc archive

           You cannot modify specific chapters other than the most recent
           chapter in terms of deleting files.

           You can remove the most recent chapter with one of the following
           commands:

           ARJ d archive *.* -jb
           ARJ dc archive *.*

           If you do not specify the "-jb" with a delete command, the
           archive chapter label will not be deleted.

           You can comment the chapter labels as a way of identifying each
           chapter backup.

           ARJ c archive -hbc -jz         comments the last chapter label
           ARJ c archive "<<*" -jz        comments the last chapter label
           ARJ c archive -hbc -jz -jb*    comments all chapter labels
           ARJ c archive -hbc -jz -jb5    comments the label for chapter 5

      jb0: clear chapter archive status

           This switch is used with the "y" command to convert a
           standard archive to a chapter archive.

           ARJ y archive -jb0   converts chapter archive to standard archive

      jb*: select all chapter backup files

           This switch is used to select all chapters.

           When it is used with the LIST command, ARJ displays all chapters.

           ARJ l archive -jb*     displays all chapters

       jc: exit after Count of files

           The "-jc" option sets ARJ to exit early from an archive scan
           when the specified number of files have been extracted, listed,
           printed, etc.  If no number has been specified, ARJ will set
           that number to the number of filename arguments.

           Examples:  ARJ e -jc archive file1 file2 file3
                      ARJ e -jc5 archive *.bat

           Note that "*.*" is considered a count of ONE argument.

           This option does NOT WORK when modifying an archive.

       jd: ensure free Disk space

           In extraction mode, this option causes ARJ always to ensure that
           it will leave the user specified amount of disk space available.
           ARJ will skip files that would exceed the disk space available
           limit.  Each file that is skipped will count as an error.  The
           default free space is zero bytes.

           Example:  ARJ e archive basedir\ *.doc -jd100K

           In the above example, ARJ will not extract any files that will
           cause the disk free space to be less than 100,000 bytes.  The
           "K" is a synonym for "000".  For example, 100K means 100000.

           In "l"ist or "v"erbose list mode, this option sets an error
           check at the end of the listing screen based upon the total of
           the original sizes of the files selected.  If the total size
           would exceed the user specified free space limit, ARJ will
           report an error at the end of the listing screen.

           Example:  ARJ l archive *.doc -jd10000

           In this example, ARJ will report an error if the current
           available disk space minus the total of the *.doc files is less
           than the specified minimum of 10,000 bytes.

           Example:  ARJ e archive *.* -jd0

           In this example, ARJ will skip extraction of any files that
           would result in a disk full error.

       je: create self-Extracting archive

           This option causes ARJ/ARJ32 to create a self-extracting .EXE 
           file instead of an .ARJ file. 

           NOTE:  A distribution license is required to distribute ARJ and 
           ARJ32 self-extracting archives.  A standard registration is not
           sufficient.

           See the file SFX.TXT for more information.
           
       jf: store/use Full specified path

           Normally, ARJ will strip all pathnames of drive letter and root
           symbol.  This switch disables this action.  When extracting with
           the "x" command from an archive that was built with this switch,
           ARJ will normally strip any drive letter and root symbol, unless
           the "-jf" option is specified again.

           Example: ARJ x archive -jf f:\data\1995\report.*

           The "-jf1" option will strip only the drive spec and NOT the
           root symbol.  You can use either the "-jf" or "-jf1" option
           during extraction to force use of the root directory.

           As of ARJ 2.42a, ARJ will always filename match using the full
           pathname even for extraction.

           Example: ARJ x archive d:\temp f:\data\1995\report.*

       jh: set Huffman buffer size

           ARJ has a default static Huffman buffer size of 16,384 bytes.
           This buffer size is better for compressing executable files.

           The buffer size in ARJ 0.15 and earlier was set to 65,500 bytes.
           That size is better for large text files.  You may specify a
           buffer size from 2,048 to 65,535 bytes.

           Example:  ARJ a archive *.txt -jh65500

           If you specify a Huffman buffer size, ARJ will use that size for
           all types of files specified by the archive command.

       ji: set Index filename

           The "-ji" switch is used to create an index file containing the
           filenames archived or meeting certain criteria.  This is
           especially helpful when using ARJ to do multiple floppy type
           archives.  This file SHOULD NOT be created on the floppy
           diskette if the floppy diskette is changed during the archival
           process.

           If the index file already exists, ARJ will append data to it.

           The index file contains three types of text lines.  The first
           type is the volume name record.  It contains the date, time,
           starting file position, and the archive name.  The second type
           is the filename record.  It contains only the filename.  The
           third type only occurs during archival with testing "-jt".  It
           is a line containing "Testing " and the archive name.

           This information is also useful for restarting "-v" multiple
           volume archives.  You need the filename and the starting file
           position.

           The "-ji" switch will log the following events:

           a, f, m, u - Log actual filenames added to archive and if testing
                        is enabled, the actual filenames that failed testing.
           d          - Log archived filenames deleted.
           e, x       - Log archived filenames successfully extracted.
                        Extracted files with CRC errors are NOT logged.
           j          - Log archived filenames added to archive.
           l, v       - Log archived filenames listed.
           t          - Log archived filenames that failed testing.
           w          - Log archived filenames that contain string matches.

           This logging function is especially helpful when testing and
           searching archives.  Extraction errors are logged to the index
           file.

           The "-hi" option will set ARJ to write more details to the index
           file.

           At ARJ 2.61, ARJ will also log extraction errors to the index
           file.

       jk: Keep temp archive on error

           When the "-jk" switch has been specified, ARJ will keep the
           temporary archive during an aborted archive build/update.
           During a failed build, ARJ will modify the temporary archive to
           make it usable by removing the broken portion.

       jl: display only filespecs

           The "-jl" option sets ARJ to display only the filespec of a
           filename during the progress displays.  This will simplify the
           display output.

       jm: set Maximum compression

           The "-jm" switch sets the maximum compression mode.  This mode
           is used with method 1 "-m1" to increase its compression.  This
           may increase compression time significantly.

           You can get a 1 to 5 percent improvement in compression with
           ARJ -m1 -jm.

           The "-jm1" option provides slightly less compression than "-jm"
           at a faster speed.  This can range from slightly faster to much
           faster.

           Use of "-jm" with "-m2", "-m3", or "-m4" is NOT SUPPORTED.

       jn: set restart Name

           The "-jn" switch is used to restart interrupted multiple volume
           archives in conjunction with the "-jx" switch.  All selected
           files are skipped up to but not including the named file.

           Example:  ARJ a volume -v360 -r -jn\BIN\TREE.COM -jx1230

           In the above example, all files scanned up to \BIN\TREE.COM are
           skipped.  Archiving will start at file position 1230 of file
           \BIN\TREE.COM.

           IMPORTANT!!!  The exact name of the starting file must be
           specified according to the wildnames/filespecs specified.  This
           name is the same as displayed by the Adding filename display and
           the same as written to the "-ji" index file.  Please note that
           \DOS\TREE.COM is not considered the same as DOS\TREE.COM with
           this option.

           New at ARJ 2.39 is the feature where ARJ will automatically
           scan the previously written index file ("-ji") to get the
           necessary restart information.  You only need append "-jn" to
           the previous backup command line.  This option will not work
           without the index file.  ARJ will automatically set the correct
           volume name.

           Example:  ARJ a a:backup c:\*.* -r -vvas -jiINDEX.FIL
                     ARJ a a:backup c:\*.* -r -vvas -jiINDEX.FIL -jn

       jo: query when updating an archive file

           The "-jo" option has two flavors.

           The "-jo" switch is used to query the user when using the ARJ
           "a" or "m" commands to add files to an archive.  Before ARJ
           overwrites an existing internal archive file when using "-jo",
           ARJ will query the user with "Update <filename>? ".  Without
           this option, ARJ will overwrite the internal archive file
           without querying.

       jo: extract to unique Output names

           The "-jo" switch during extraction allows automated handling of
           duplicate filenames.

           On extraction with the "-jo" switch where the output file
           already exists in the target directory, ARJ will attempt to
           generate a unique filename by changing the file extension to a 3
           digit number from .000 to .999.  If ARJ cannot generate a unique
           name, it will skip extracting the file.

           Do not try to extract multiple volume split files in separate
           extraction sessions using the "-jo" option.  ARJ will not be
           able to determine the correct output filename.

           New to this release, the "-jo" option during extraction works
           along with the "-f" and "-u" type options.  In other words, if
           you want to freshen a set of files from an archive, the use of
           the "-jo" option will generate unique names for any files
           extracted.

           Example:  ARJ x archive *.* -u -jo

      jo1: extract to unique Output names keeping file extension

           This switch will set ARJ on extraction to generate unique 
           output filenames AND keep the current file extension.

           Example: NOTE.TXT will generate NOTE.001.TXT and so on.

       jp: Pause after each screenful

           This switch will cause ARJ to pause after listing each screenful
           of data for the "l", "p", "v", "w" commands.  Press the ENTER
           key to continue the listing.  You can also enter "quit" to exit
           ARJ.

           In one special case, "ARJ -? -jp", the use of the -jp switch
           toggles page pauses off, because by default in help mode,
           pausing is on.

           You can specify the page size with the "-jp" option as in
           "-jp50".  This also turns on the pause mode.  If you wish to use
           this in ARJ_SW, it is suggested that you use "-jp50 -jp-" to set
           the page size and to turn off the pause mode.

       jq: set string parameter

           The "-jq" option is used to supply additional parameters to the ARJ
           w and ARJ b commands.  If the parameters contain blanks, then the
           entire "-jq" option must be enclosed by two double quote marks.

           See the "w" and "b" commands for the correct "-jq" syntax.

       jr: Recover broken archive files

           This switch is used to access headers and files in an archive
           that has been corrupted either with bad data or missing data.
           This switch lets ARJ find the next valid header for listing,
           extraction or testing.  ARJ will continue to look for headers
           until it finds the end of archive marker.  If the archive is
           damaged, ARJ may display a message stating that it encountered
           the end of file unexpectedly.

           This switch also will allow extraction of files with CRC or
           Bad file data errors.  Normally, ARJ will delete such extracted
           files.

           If file header data has been corrupted, ARJ will be unable to
           recover any file data associated with that header.  As of ARJ
           2.30, "Bad file data" errors will not abort the recovery
           process.

           Example:  ARJ e archive -jr

           The "-jr1" version of this switch allows processing of damaged
           ARJ archives that have an end of archive mark in the middle of
           the archive.  However, the use of this switch will always cause
           ARJ to display an "unexpected end of file" error message and to
           return a non-zero errorlevel.

           Refer to the section on ARJ-PROTECT data protection for a 
           better recovery scheme.

       js: Store archives by suffix

           This switch is used to set ARJ to store and not compress files
           with the following extensions: .ARJ, .ZIP, .LZH, .PAK, .ARC,
           .J, .RAR, .UC2, .ZOO

           The file extensions can be specified as follows:

           ARJ a archive -js.zoo.ice.gif

           The above command will store files with extensions ending in
           .ZOO, .ICE, and .GIF.  This overrides the defaults.

           You can use the environment variable ARJ_SW to set up your own
           defaults as follows:

           set arj_sw=-js.arj.zip.lzh -js-

           The "-js-" turns off the option by default so that when you
           specify the "-js" switch on the command line, ARJ will already
           know what extensions you want to store.

           The "-js" switch will recognize "." alone as a file extension
           indicating no file extension as in "-js." and "-js..arc"

       jt: Test temporary archive

           The "-jt" switch can used to set ARJ to execute an archive
           integrity check on an intermediate temporary archive before
           overwriting any pre-existing original archive.  If any error
           occurs, ARJ will not overwrite the original archive.  When used
           with the "-w" switch option, ARJ will also test the final
           archive file as well as the temporary archive before deleting
           any input files.

           Example:  ARJ m archive *.c -jt

           The "-jt" switch can be used with extract type commands to set
           ARJ to verify the archive before doing any extraction of files.
           If the archive fails verification, the extraction is NOT
           attempted.  This is useful for handling MAIL packets where
           archive corruption due to a bad file transfer is a fairly
           frequent event.

           Example:  ARJ e archive -jt

           The "-jt1" switch allows an actual file contents comparison in
           addition to the normal file CRC calculation check.  This option
           can also be used with the ARJ t (test) command.

           When used with the ARJ t command, ARJ "-jt1" will use the
           base_directory option and the filename stored in the archive to
           locate the original file.

           When used with the ARJ add/move/update type commands, ARJ will
           use only the filename stored in the archive to locate the
           original file.  Therefore, the "-jt1" option does NOT work with
           the "-e" option or when the original filename has a drive letter
           or root directory in it and you did not specify "-jf".

           Examples:  ARJ t -jt1 archive dir\
                      ARJ a -jt1 archive e:\temp\*.*  -jf

           When used during a chapter add, the "-jt1" option will compare
           only the files of the added chapter.  Previous chapters will
           only be CRC tested.

           Example: ARJ ac archive c:\dir\*.* -jt1

           The "-jt2" switch allows the same features as "-jt1" except that
           the file compares are only done for the newly added/updated
           files.  This avoids the situation where the some of original
           input files are missing or have changed.  NOTE that a problem
           can occur with the "f" and "u" commands when files in the
           archive are NEWER than the files being added.  ARJ will
           considered the file up-to-date and added and will do a file
           compare.

           Example:  ARJ u -jt2 archive dir\

           The "-jt3" switch allows one to do a quick compare of files
           within an archive and on disk.  ARJ will only compare the
           date-time stamps and the size of the files.

           Example:  ARJ t archive -jt3

           There is a limitation in that multiple volume archives will 
           generate (size) errors for the files split over volumes.

           In DOS and Windows 9x when using removable media (diskettes), 
           ARJ will flush and invalidate cached diskette data from memory, 
           so that testing is done on the actual data on the diskette.  A 
           side effect of this improvement in reliability is longer 
           diskette testing times.
       
       ju: translate UNIX style paths

           This switch causes ARJ to translate any subsequently encountered
           pathnames to MS-DOS style from UNIX style.  This switch also
           causes translation of filenames entered as a result of ARJ
           prompts such as in comment filenames.

           Example:  ARJ a archive -ju /soft/*.c

       jv: set Verbose display

           This switch sets ARJ to display more information during the
           "t"est, "l"ist, and "ex"tract commands.

           Example:  ARJ t archive -jv

           The "-jv" switch causes the "v" command to display only the
           pathnames to the screen.

           The "-jv switch causes the "l" command to display chapter
           range numbers instead of the CRC value.

           The "-jv1" switch causes the "v" command to display the archive
           data in manner suitable for sorting on various fields.

           The "-jv" switch will set the "p", "s", and "w" commands to
           display IBM graphics characters (128 to 255).

           When updating a file in an archive with a file that is NOT
           newer and if the -jv option is selected, ARJ will display a
           message that there is "no change".

       jw: set extract output filename

           The "-jw" option allows you to specify the name of the
           extraction output file.  You should only select one file to
           extract when using this option.

           This is similar but not exactly the same as using the "p"
           command with DOS output redirection.  Using DOS redirection would
           cause all of the output of the extraction to be put into the
           output file.  Using "-jw" would set ARJ to prompt for
           overwrite permission per each file extracted to the output file.

           This option may be needed when trying to output binary data to
           a printer.

           Example:  ARJ e archive printer.dat -jwLPT1

       jx: start at eXtended position

           This switch is used to continue a file onto a new archive
           manually.  This switch is normally for use when a multiple
           volume "a" command has aborted.

           Example:  ARJ a arjvol.a01 manual.doc -jx100000

           This example archives manual.doc starting from file byte
           position 100,000 and on.

           In extraction mode, this sets ARJ to extract a file to an output
           file at a specified starting position.

           Example:  ARJ e -jx2000000 archive file1

           This example extracts the file "file1" to file1 starting at
           position 2,000,000 or at the end of the file.

           This is similar to using the command "ARJ p archive >> output".
           To duplicate this redirection with ARJ would require the
           following:

           ARJ e -jx2000K -jwoutput archive

           NOTE that the -jx option is NOT functional when adding a file to
           an archive that already contains one or more files.

           As a recovery technique, you can use the -jx option to force 
           the extraction of a file split across volumes when the starting 
           volume is lost or damaged.

           Example:  ARJ e archive.a01 splitfilename -jx0 

       jy: suppress queries assuming YES

           This switch is used to suppress individual ARJ user prompts.

           Syntax:  ARJ e archive -jy<flags>

           where <flags> is one or more of the following characters: a, c,
           d, k, n, o, s, v.  For each flag selected, ARJ will act as if
           you had answered YES to the suppressed question.

           A - skip append query during a multi-volume extraction
           C - skip create directory query
           D - skip delete files query
           K - skip disk space availability query
           N - skip new filename prompt
           O - skip overwriting existing file query
           R - erase all typeahead before prompting
           S - skip scanned enough text query
           V - skip ok to proceed to next volume query
           Y - accept single character Y/N/A/Q inputs

           Example:  ARJ x volume -v -jyaco
                     suppress append, create, and overwrite prompts.

           ARJ will allow you to specify individual "jy" options in
           separate switch strings as in "-jyy -jyr".  You may inhibit a
           switch as in "-jyr-".  As with other switches, the "jy" switches
           toggle as in "-jyr -jyr".

           As a clarification of older documentation, the "-jyv" option
           will disable the next volume prompt EVEN with removable media.
           The global "-y" option does not disable the next volume prompt
           with removable media.

       jz: supply file for file comment

           The "-jz" switch has been provided to facilitate batch
           commenting of one or more files within an ARJ archive.  Only one
           comment file can be specified.  That file will be used to
           comment each file specified on the command line.

           A comment file containing only a single blank can be used to
           erase comments from ARJ archives.

           Syntax:  ARJ c archive file1 -jzcomment.txt
                    ARJ c archive file1 -zheader.cmt -jzfile.cmt

           ARJ does not support the use of the -jz option with ARJ
           commands other than "c" as in ARJ c archive -jz.

       h#: append current date/time string

           The "-h#" switch sets ARJ to append the current date string in
           the form YYMMDD to the current archive name while keeping the
           file extension the same.

           The "-h#1" switch sets ARJ to append the current time string in
           the form HHMMSS to the current archive name while keeping the
           file extension the same.

           The "-h#2" switch sets ARJ to append the current date-time
           string in the form DHHMMSS to the current archive name while
           keeping the file extension the same.  In a ten day period, this
           option can be used to generate unique archive names.

           Examples:  ARJ a XX -h# *.c    creates archive name XX931209.ARJ
                      ARJ a YY -h#1       creates archive name YY123000.ARJ
                      ARJ a Y -h#2        creates archive name Y8123000.ARJ

           This function does NO checking for exceeding the proper filename
           length.  There are no options for rearranging the date/time
           formats.

           This feature has been modified to use only the last two digits 
           of the year.  So the year 2010 will be represented by "10".  
           This will still provide "uniqueness" for filename generation.  
           Daily created archives will not collide name-wise for 100 years.
       
       h$: try to use long filenames (Windows 2000)

           This feature forces ARJ to attempt to use Win95 DOS long 
           filename support functions under other operating systems such 
           as Windows 2000.
        
           Apparently, Windows 2000 provides some of the DOS program 
           longname functionality that Windows 95/98 provides.  This 
           switch option forces ARJ to try to access Windows 2000 long 
           filenames.

           Windows NT does not provide these DOS long filename functions.

           ARJ Software provides this option as a result of user requests.
           However, since this DOS access hook is not an official Windows 
           2000 feature, we cannot provide technical support for this 
           feature.  We do provide the program ARJ32 to fully support the 
           Windows 32 bit environment (including long filenames) in 
           Windows 95, 98, NT, ME, and 2000.
        
       ha: ignore readonly Attribute

           The "-ha" switch sets ARJ to reset the attributes of a file or a 
           directory to be overwritten or a file to be deleted.  This 
           allows the overwrite or delete operation to proceed.

           A slight performance degradation may result from using this
           option.

           Examples:  ARJ e archive -ha
                      ARJ m archive -ha dir\*.*

       hb: select by file attribute or type

           This switch is used to select by file attribute or file type.

           The "-hb" option can be used to select files by their attributes
           (normal, readonly, hidden, system, directory, and archive bit).
           "Normal" is defined as files that are NOT the following:
           readonly, hidden, system, label, chapter header, or directory.
           For extract/list operations, you can also select chapter labels
           and volume labels.  By default, the "-hb" option by itself
           selects all types of files.  If you specify a letter symbol
           representing a file type, you are selecting ONLY that type of
           file.  You can specify a series of letters representing all of
           the file types that you want to select.  For example, the
           "-hbdr" option selects both directories and readonly files.
           Selections are additive.

           Example: -hbnr   select only normal and readonly files

           Single letters represent each attribute or type.
             a - archive bit set
             b - archive bit clear
             h - hidden
             r - readonly
             s - system
             d - directory
             n - normal files (not d, h, r, s, l, c)
             l - volume label
             c - chapter label
             f - abbreviation for "ndhrs"
             w - Windows 9x long filenames

           The archive bit selection ("a" or "b") is a special case.  If
           you have selected no types of files EXCEPT files with the
           archive bit set, ARJ will select from the set of all file types.
           If you have selected one or more file types, ARJ will select
           based upon the archive bit from the selected set of files types.

           Examples: -hbhrsa      select hidden, readonly files with
                                  archive bit set
                     -hba         select all files with archive bit set

           Add/update options  : f, d, r, h, s, n, a, b.

           Extract/list options: f, d, r, h, s, n, a, b, c, l, w.

           Examples:  ARJ a archive *.* -r -hbrs   select only readonly
                                                   and system files
                      ARJ a archive *.* -r -hbd    store only directories
                      ARJ l archive *.* -hbr       list only readonly files
                      ARJ l archive -jb* -hbc      list chapter headers

           Notes:  The option "-hb" with no letter options is an
           abbreviation for "-hbndhrslc" (all types).

       hc: execute DOS Command at ARJ start

           The "-hc" switch sets ARJ to execute a DOS command at the start
           of the execution of ARJ immediately after the command line switch
           options have been processed, but before the wildcard search is
           started.  This can be used to clear the screen to hide the
           command line or to provide a pause option to allow swapping
           diskettes.

           Examples:  ARJ a -hcCLS archive -gpassword
                      ARJ a -hcPAUSE archive *.*

       he: skip test of security Envelope

           The "-he" switch sets ARJ to skip the verification step when
           accessing an ARJ-SECURED ARJ archive.  If an ARJ archive has
           a damaged ARJ-SECURITY envelope, you will have to use the "-he"
           option to extract the archive.

      he1: set error on security Envelopes

           The "-he1" switch sets ARJ to abort with an error code of 4 when
           processing a possibly ARJ-SECURED archive.  This is useful as a
           REARJ.CFG option for ARJ.  This will prevent REARJ from
           converting an ARJ-SECURED archive to the same or another format.

           Examples:  ARJ l secured.arj -he1

       hf: set short filenames only

           This switch disables Windows 9x long filename handling.  ARJ
           will use the standard DOS 8.3 APIs (DOS shortnames) to do its
           processing.  Files so archived with this switch can be extracted
           under Windows 9x and DOS.

           This switch can be used while listing a dual-name archive under
           Win9x to list/process the shortnames.

      hf1: set longnames in file comment or extract with W95LNAME.nnn name

           This switch in Win9x during archival sets ARJ to build a
           dual-name compatibility archive by storing the shortname in the
           filename field and the longname in the file comment field, so
           that both long filenames and short filenames are stored in the
           archive.

           Such a dual-name archive is compatible with older versions of
           ARJ. New versions of ARJ process such an archive according to
           the current operating system environment.  Under Win9x, the long
           filenames in the archive are used.  Under MS-DOS, the short
           filenames are used.  This processing is automatic for this
           release of ARJ.

           The "-e1" option does not affect the short name that is stored.

           During extraction this switch sets ARJ to extract files from a
           Win9x archive (built without "-hf" option) by using generated
           names.  ARJ will generate a short name based upon "W95LNAME.000"
           and its sequence number in the archive.

           Specifying the "-ji" option with an index filename along with
           "-hf1" will generate an index file with the W95LNAME.000 names
           and the associated long filenames.  The long filenames are
           quoted.

           Example:  ARJ x archive -hf1 -jiindex.log

           This option with "-ji" can be useful when trying restore long
           filenames on a system that allows long filenames such as
           OS/2, WinNT, or Linux.

           Please note that modifying a dual-name archive outside of
           Windows 9x is possible but it may produce an archive with some
           dual-names and some not.

           The "-hf1" option has no effect on a dual-name archive during
           extraction.

           Please note the shortname stored may be an absolute pathname.

      hf2: use long filenames in DOS

           This switch sets ARJ to attempt to extract using the long
           filenames stored in the archive.  No modification is done to the
           long filenames except by DOS itself.  This switch also sets ARJ
           to use the standard DOS 8.3 APIs for processing.  Because of the
           shortening of the filenames by DOS, duplicate filenames may
           result.

      hf3: set longnames in file comment and wildcard using shortnames

           This switch in Win9x during archival sets ARJ to build a
           dual-name compatibility archive by storing the shortname in the
           filename field and the longname in the file comment field, so
           that both long filenames and short filenames are stored in the
           archive.

           This is similar to the "-hf1" switch functionality EXCEPT that
           ARJ wildcard scans the file system using shortname wildcards.

           This switch provides a way of archiving files that have Win9x
           DOS inaccessible symbols in them like the copyright and
           trademark symbols.  Win9x DOS displays those filenames with the
           "_" character.  ARJ will store the long filename with the "_"
           character as is.  However, this means that a restore of the
           archive will not restore the filename as it was with the
           inaccessible copyright or trademark symbol.  It will be restored
           with a "_" symbol.

           Please note the longname stored may be an absolute pathname.
           
           When building a dual-name archive, ARJ will now check for files 
           that have long filenames inaccessible through MS-DOS.  These 
           are filenames that contain symbols that WIN9x/MS-DOS translates 
           into the underscore "_" symbol.  ARJ will display the "Can't 
           open ..." error message for each such file encountered.

      hf4: set ARJ to label all files as Windows 9x long filenames.
     
           This switch sets ARJ to label all files archived under Windows 9x
           as Windows 9x long filenames.  ARJ at 2.61 will by default
           label as Windows 9x long filenames only those files whose Windows
           9x long filename is different from its MS-DOS filename.
     
       hg: specify garble module filename

           This switch is used to specify the filename of the encryption
           module to be used when encrypting a new archive.  The default
           filename is "ARJCRYPT.COM".  ARJCRYPT.COM contains a new 
           encryption scheme that is partly incompatible with earlier 
           releases of ARJ.  This new scheme will accept passwords up to 64 
           characters.  The old scheme accepted only the first 32 characters
           of a password.  As long as your passwords are 32 characters or 
           less, your archives will be compatible with ARJ 2.60 encryption.
           
           ARJ will look for the encryption module in the directory that 
           contains the copy ARJ.EXE that is being executed unless the 
           specified module name contains a path symbol "\" as in 
           "ARJ\OLDCRYPT.COM".  If you want to use a module in the current 
           directory, you should specify the name as in ".\ARJCRYPT.COM".  
           The "." indicates the current directory.

           With an existing archive, ARJ detects the encryption scheme that
           was used to encrypt the archive and uses the same scheme 
           regardless of whether the "-hg" option is specified or not.  
           However, if you encrypted with a non-default ARJCRYPT.COM, you 
           must specify the pathname with the "-hg" option.

      hg!: set ARJ to use the 40 bit garble algorithm

           This switch is used to specify the use of a built-in 40 bit
           version of the Russian GOST encryption algorithm.  This 
           algorithm is limited to a 40 bit key to meet USA encryption 
           export rules. Any password input to this function will be 
           crunched down to a 40 bit size.  Only the first 32 characters 
           of the password will be accepted.
       
       hi: full detail display in Index files

           The "-hi" switch when used with the "-ji" switch sets ARJ to
           include the file date-time stamp, the original file size, the
           compressed file size, the compression ratio, and the filename in
           the index file.

           Example:  ARJ a a:backup c:\*.* -r -va -jiINDEX -hi

       hk: enable ARJ-PROTECT data damage protection

           The "-hk" switch sets ARJ to create ARJ-PROTECT damage 
           protection data which is appended to the archive.  This 
           ARJ-PROTECT data contains necessary information to repair 
           damage to the protected archive.  The "-hk1", "-hk2" .... 
           "-hk9" options will generate more ARJ-PROTECT data affording a 
           higher probability of a successful repair at the cost of a 
           larger archive.
           
           This protection feature is sector based and allows repair due 
           to typical types of disk corruption (bad sector, virus damage, 
           cross links, etc).  This type of sector protection is NOT 
           effective for most data transmission problems where data is 
           missing from the middle of a transmission.

           If an archive already exists, the archive can be ARJ-PROTECTED 
           via the "t" command.  If the archive is already protected, ARJ
           will not protect it again.

           Example:  ARJ t archive -hk             appends ARJ-PROTECT data

           Please note that you CANNOT ARJ-PROTECT an existing unprotected
           multiple volume archive.  Doing so would cause the volume sizes 
           to overflow.  There is an exception if the volumes are on the 
           hard disk drive and not on removable media.
           
           Repair of a damaged ARJ-PROTECTED archive is done with the "Q" 
           command.  The repaired archive is named ARJFIXED.ARJ.  The 
           original damaged archive is not modified.  In addition, 
           ARJFIXED.ARJ is newly ARJ-PROTECTED.
                     
           Example:  ARJ q docs                    repairs archive

           For older style ARJ-PROTECTED archives (with accompanying .XRJ 
           file), you must specify the "-hk" option along with the "q" 
           command.

           Example:  ARJ q docs -hk                repairs archive

           Once an archive has been ARJ-PROTECTED, future archive updates
           will automatically include ARJ-PROTECTION.  That feature can be
           disabled with the "y" command.  The -hkX protection factor 
           stored in the ARJ-PROTECTED archive is used when updating the 
           archive.

           Example:  ARJ y docs -hk

       hl: return error for Listfile error

           The "-hl" switch sets ARJ to report the "file not found" type 
           of errors when processing the filenames in an ARJ listfile 
           during an "add" type command (a, f, m, u).  ARJ will 
           subsequently return a non-zero DOS errorlevel when such an 
           error has been found.  Previous versions of ARJ ignored these 
           types of errors.

           Example:  ARJ a a:backup !listfile -va -hl

       hm: increase filename capacity

           The "-hm" switch sets ARJ to transfer the list of filenames to
           be archived from the limited conventional memory to file
           storage. This allows a much larger number of files to be
           processed (up to 65,000).  This option is ignored for all ARJ
           commands except "a", "f", "j", "m", "u".

           Normally, this switch sets ARJ to wait until it is out of memory
           storing filenames into a list before transferring that list to a
           temporary file.  That temporary file is put in the current
           directory or the special work directory if specified (-hm!F:\)
           or XMS memory is specified (-hm!).

           At ARJ 2.62c, ARJ will by default set -hm3000.  This means that 
           if you are archiving over 3000 filenames, ARJ will use a disk 
           file to manage the list of filenames. 
           
           However, there may be a few cases where ARJ will run out of
           memory doing other tasks while it is storing this list.  In
           these cases, ARJ will abort.  The user can specify a numeric
           argument of "1" to this switch to force ARJ to transfer the list
           to file storage immediately.

           The "-hm" work directory is specified by appending a "!" to the
           "-hm" or "-hm1" options and then appending the filename to the
           option.  See below.

           Examples:  ARJ a archive c:\*.* -r -hm
                      ARJ a archive c:\*.* -r -hm1
                      ARJ a a:archive c:\*.* -r -va -hm500!F:\
                      ARJ a a:archive c:\*.* -r -hm!G:\temp\

           The use of a RAMDISK directory will provide the fastest
           operation.

      hm!: increase filename capacity with XMS memory

           The "-hm!" option with no pathname appended to it will set ARJ
           to store its list of filenames in XMS memory.  List processing
           will be faster using XMS memory as opposed to using disk space.
           If no XMS memory is available, ARJ will use conventional memory
           and then disk space if needed.

           If there is not enough XMS memory available for the internal
           list, ARJ will abort.  The XMS accelerator in Hurricane 2.0 for
           Windows MAY interfere with this switch while in Windows.

       hn: specify non-existent filespec

           The "-hn" switch sets the filespec that does NOT match any file.
           The default filespec is "...".  However, on some systems like
           using NOVELL, there is a valid filespec "...".  Since ARJ
           sometimes needs a filespec that is strictly a placeholder, this
           option should be used to specify some name that does not exist
           on disk.

           This option must be specified prior to any use of the
           non-matching filespec.  Setting it via the ARJ_SW variable is an
           excellent choice.

           Examples:  ARJ e -hn#### archive #### -zcomment.txt
                      SET ARJ_SW=-hn####

       ho: Only extract files with matches

           The "-ho" switch used with the "e" or "x" extract commands allows
           file extraction based upon a text search.  ARJ will prompt the
           user for text strings to search unless the "-jq" option has been
           specified.  See the "-jq" option in ARJ.TXT for detailed use
           information.  ARJ will extract a file within an archive if the
           file contains at least one occurrence of any of the specified
           search strings.

           Examples:  ARJ e archive -ho
                      ARJ e archive -ho -jq+3+textstring

      ho1: Only extract files without any matches

           The "-ho1" switch used with the "e" or "x" extract commands
           allows file extraction based upon a text search.  ARJ will
           prompt the user for text strings to search unless the "-jq"
           option has been specified.  See the "-jq" option in ARJ.TXT for
           detailed use information.  ARJ will extract a file within an
           archive if the file contain NO occurrences of any of the
           specified search strings.

           Examples:  ARJ e archive -ho1

       hq: ignore open access error on adds

           This switch sets ARJ to ignore the error that occurs when ARJ
           cannot open a file for lack of permitted access during an
           add-type command and/or a compare command.  This is DOS error
           code 5. This option applies only to files being added to a new
           archive and/or being compared.  For an existing archive, this
           option will be ignored during the add operation, but NOT during
           a subsequent compare operation.

           Typically, this switch would be used during network access or in
           Windows 9x where a file is open for exclusive use by another
           process.  Normally, in this situation, ARJ would return a
           non-zero DOS error level.  However, if this switch is specified,
           ARJ will NOT return a non-zero error level due to this specific
           open failure.

           If you use the "-ji" option to set up an index file, ARJ will
           log any file that it cannot open.

      hq1: ignore open not found error on adds

           This switch sets ARJ to ignore the error that occurs when ARJ
           cannot open a file because it cannot be found during an add-type
           command and/or a compare command.  This is DOS error code 2.
           This option applies only to files being added to a new archive
           and/or being compared.  For an existing archive, this option
           will be ignored during the add operation, but NOT during a
           subsequent compare operation.

           This open error typically happens when a temporary file that ARJ
           has found to archive is purged by another process before ARJ can
           actually open and compress/compare it.  This is not the same
           error as when a user specifies a filename on the command line
           and ARJ cannot find it.

           This error also occurs in Windows 9x when trying to archive 
           files with filenames that contain "unusual" symbols.  These are 
           the symbols that have no equivalent in MS-DOS.  MS-DOS displays 
           those symbols as "_" underscore.
           
           If you use the "-ji" option to set up an index file, ARJ will
           log any file that it cannot open.

      hq2: ignore open access error and not found error on adds

           This switch sets ARJ to ignore both the no access error and the
           not found error during an add-type command for new archives as
           above.

       hr: force processing of successive archives through errors.

           The "-hr" switch sets ARJ to attempt to continue processing
           successive archives even when they contains errors.  This option
           is aimed at ARJ wildcard use such as in the "ARJ t *.ARJ -hr"
           command.

       hs: disable file Sharing

           The "-hs" switch sets ARJ to disable its file sharing feature.
           This may be necessary for some unusual applications.

           It may also be necessary to use this option in network 
           applications.

       ht: specify Target directory

           This switch is provided as an alternative to the standard method
           of specifying a target directory.  This new option can be
           specified in the ARJ configuration file or in the ARJ_SW
           environment variable as well as on the command line.

           Examples:  ARJ x archive *.* -htD:\DESTDIR
                      SET ARJ_SW=-hf -htD:\DESTDIR

       hu: allow the Updating of multiple volume archives

           The "-hu" switch sets ARJ to allow the updating of multiple
           volume archives.  This switch is obsolete as of ARJ 2.55.  ARJ
           now supports the update of multiple volumes.

       hv: verify the ARJ version number

           The "-hv" switch is used to verify the ARJ version number and/or
           whether the ARJ program is registered.  If the "-hv" option is
           specified by itself or with an appended "R", an unregistered ARJ
           will abort with an errorlevel of 1.  If a version number string
           is appended to the "-hv" option, a lower version numbered ARJ
           will abort with with an errorlevel of 1.

           Examples:  ARJ a archive -hv         check if registered
                      ARJ a archive -hvr        check if registered
                      ARJ a archive -hv2.50     check for version >= 2.50
                      ARJ a archive -hvr2.50    check if registered and
                                                version 2.50 or greater

       hw: modify search filename display

           The "-hw" switch sets the ARJ w command to display the
           "Searching ...." filenames messages in a scroll saving format.
           Filenames of files that do not contain string matches will be
           overwritten on the screen.

           The "-hw1" switch sets the ARJ w command to display ONLY the
           "Searching ...." filenames messages for files that contain string
           messages.

           You should disable the progress indicator with the "-i" option.

       hx: specify archive file extensions

           The "-hx" switch allows the user to specify what the default
           file extension or extensions that are to be used by ARJ to
           access archive names that are not specified with file
           extensions.  ARJ will assume that the first extension specified
           will be the main default extension.

           Examples:  ARJ a archive *.* -hx.SDN   assumes default .SDN
                                                  file extension
                      ARJ l archive -hx.SDN.ARJ   looks for archive.SDN and
                                                  if not found, then looks
                                                  for archive.ARJ

       hy: set ARJ to extract using ANSI codepage

           This switch will set ARJ to allow the extraction of ARJ32 
           created archives containing ANSI codepage filenames.  ARJ for 
           DOS always uses the OEM codepage which may translate ANSI 
           codepage filenames incorrectly or not at all.  Filenames 
           containing only alphanumeric characters and the DOT symbol 
           should be translated correctly.

       hy: set ARJ32 to archive using ANSI codepage

           For typical English language use, this option is not necessary.
           
           The default for ARJ32 is the OEM codepage.

           When processing an archive, ARJ32 selects the codepage that was
           set when making the archive.  
           
           ARJ32 provides the "-hy1" and the "-hy2" option to override the 
           setting in the archive.  The "-hy1" option selects the OEM 
           codepage.  The "-hy2" option selects the ANSI codepage.  On 
           some systems with pathnames with special symbols, it may be 
           necessary to use the "-hy2" option to force extraction using 
           the ANSI codepage.

       hz: specify ARJ-SECURE feature (requires ARJ-SECURE key)


     ARJ COMMAND OPTIONS:

        Some of the following options have variations such as -s as in
        -s, -s1, -s2.

        The following options work for ALL ARJ commands.

        !names.lst
        -o
        -ob
        -od
        --
        -+
        -&
        -!
        -i
        -l
        -r   this affects wildcarded archive names, too.
        -s
        -x
        -y
        -ja
        -jl
        -jt
        -ju
        -jy
        -h#
        -h#1
        -hb
        -hc
        -he
        -he1
        -hn
        -hr
        -hs
        -hv
        -hx

        The following options work for all ARJ commands that modify
        ARJ archives.

        -k
        -s
        -w
        -z
        -jb
        -je
        -jk
        -hm


        In addition the following options work for ARJ a, f, m, u commands.

        -a
        -b
        -m
        -r
        -t
        -j#
        -jh
        -ji
        -jm
        -jn
        -js
        -hi
        -hk
        -hl
        -hm


        The following options work for ARJ y command.

        -jb
        -je
        -g
        -hg


        The following options work for ALL but the ARJ a, f, m, u commands.

        The name of the archive can be a wildspec.
        -#
        -d
        -e
        -p
        -jr


        The following options work for the ARJ a, f, m, u, e, x
        commands.

        -$
        -c
        -f
        -g
        -n
        -u
        -jf
        -ji
        -jx
        -hi


        The following options work for the ARJ e, x commands.

        -d
        -jc
        -jw
        -ho
        -ho1


        The following options work for the ARJ l, v commands

        -n
        -jp


        The following options have limited use.

        -q   - works for all commands except j, l, n, o, t, v, w, y
        -v   - works for l, v, w commands
        -jc  - works for e, x, l, v commands
        -jp  - works for l, v, w commands
        -jq  - works for b, w, commands
        -jv  - works for most commands
        -hw  - works for w command


     SAMPLE ARJ COMMANDS:

        a: Add files to archive

           ARJ a archive
           ARJ a archive -n
           ARJ a archive -f
           ARJ a archive -jt
           ARJ a archive -jt1
           ARJ a archive -jt2
           ARJ a archive -q
           ARJ a archive -r -hk
           ARJ a archive dir\ -o
           ARJ a archive dir\
           ARJ a archive dir\ *.doc *.exe
           ARJ a archive !names.lst
           ARJ a archive -- -name-.txt
           ARJ a archive name1 name2 name3
           ARJ a a:archive -we:\ -vas c:\ -r -b2
           ARJ a a:archive.001 -we:\ -vvw360 c:\ -r -b1
           ARJ a archive -vw360 c:\ -r -y
           ARJ a archive c:\ *.* -r -jt1 -jf


        b: execute Batch or DOS command

           ARJ b archive name.txt
           ARJ b archive -jwOUT.NAM
           ARJ b archive SHEZ.EXE -jwSHEZ.EXE
           ARJ b archive *.exe -jwTEMP.EXE "-jqTEMP -help"


        c: Comment archive files

           ARJ c archive
           ARJ c archive -z
           ARJ c archive -zcomment.txt
           ARJ c archive -zNUL
           ARJ c archive file1 -jzcomment.txt
           ARJ c archive *.doc -jzNUL


        d: Delete files from archive

           ARJ d archive *.doc
           ARJ d archive *.* -n
           ARJ d archive *.* -y
           ARJ d archive !names.lst


        e: Extract files from archive

           ARJ e archive *.doc
           ARJ e archive *.doc -d
           ARJ e archive -jd50000
           ARJ e archive -jo
           ARJ e archive -c
           ARJ e archive dir\ *.doc -jt
           ARJ e archive *.doc -y
           ARJ e archive -# 10 15 20-40


        f: Freshen files in archive

           ARJ f archive
           ARJ f archive -r
           ARJ f archive dir\ -r
           ARJ f archive dir\ *.doc -r
           ARJ f archive dir\ -r -jt2


        g: Garble files in archive

           ARJ g archive -gpassword
           ARJ g archive *.doc -gpassword
           ARJ g archive -g?
           ARJ g archive -gpassword -hg


        i: check Integrity of ARJ.EXE

           ARJ i
           ARJ i c:\bin\arj.exe


        j: Join archives to archive

           ARJ j archive name1.arj name2.arj name3.arj
           ARJ j archive *.arj
           ARJ j archive arjsfx.exe
           ARJ j archive *.arj -o911201
           ARJ j archive *.arj -r


        k: purge bacKup files in archive

           ARJ k archive *.*
           ARJ k archive *.* -y
           ARJ k archive *.doc -n


        l: List contents of archive

           ARJ l archive
           ARJ l archive *.doc
           ARJ l archive -o911201
           ARJ l archive -o911201 -ob911231
           ARJ l archive -n
           ARJ l archive -jp


        m: Move files to archive

           ARJ m archive
           ARJ m archive *.doc
           ARJ m archive dir\ *.doc
           ARJ m archive dir\ *.doc -o
           ARJ m a:archive.001 dir\ -r -vvwas -jt2


        n: reName files in archive

           ARJ n archive
           ARJ n archive *.doc
           ARJ n archive !names.lst
           ARJ n archive -o911201


        o: Order files in archive

           ARJ o archive !names.lst
           ARJ o archive *.bat *.exe *.doc
           ARJ o archive file1 file2 file3


        p: Print files to standard output

           ARJ p archive
           ARJ p archive -jp
           ARJ p archive *.doc
           ARJ p archive -o911201
           ARJ p archive name.txt > PRN


        r: Remove paths from filenames

           ARJ r archive
           ARJ r archive *.doc
           ARJ r archive -o911201 -ob911231


        s: Sample files to screen with pause

           ARJ s archive
           ARJ s archive *.doc -y
           ARJ s *.arj -y -r


        t: Test integrity of archive

           ARJ t archive
           ARJ t archive *.exe
           ARJ t archive !names.lst
           ARJ t archive -jt1


        u: Update files to archive

           ARJ u archive *.doc
           ARJ u archive *.doc -jo


        v: Verbosely list contents of archive

           ARJ v archive
           ARJ v archive *.doc
           ARJ v archive -jv
           ARJ v archive -jv1
           ARJ v archive -jp


        w: Where are text strings in archive

           ARJ w archive
           ARJ w archive -hw
           ARJ w archive -jp
           ARJ w *.arj -jp
           ARJ w *.arj *.doc
           ARJ w *.arj *.txt -jq+5+string
           ARJ w archive "-jq-3-to be or not"


        x: eXtract files with full pathname

           ARJ x archive *.doc
           ARJ x archive *.doc -d
           ARJ x archive -jd50000
           ARJ x archive -jo
           ARJ x archive -c
           ARJ x archive dir\ *.doc
           ARJ x archive -jf
           ARJ x archive *.doc -jyc


        y: copY archive with new options

           ARJ y archive -je
           ARJ y archive -je1
           ARJ y archive -jb
           ARJ y archive -jb1
           ARJ y archive -jb2
           ARJ y archive *.bat -jb2
           ARJ y archive -gpassword


     ARJ_SECURITY ENVELOPE:

        The ARJ-SECURITY ENVELOPE feature provides a facility similar to
        other archivers.  This feature disallows any type of modification,
        even commenting, to an ARJ-SECURE sealed archive by ARJ.  Moreover,
        there are additional internal checks to determine if the ARJ-SECURE
        sealed archive has been modified in any way.  This EXTRA cost
        feature is intended for use by software developers who distribute
        their software in archived format and is only available for a
        special fee.  However, there can be no guarantee that this
        mechanism cannot be defeated.

        When accessing an ARJ-SECURED archive, ARJ will display a message
        indicating that ARJ is verifying the security envelope.  If the
        envelope is damaged, a message will be displayed indicating so. If
        the envelope is intact, then the ARJ-SECURITY signature of the user
        "sealing" the archive will be displayed.

        If the security envelope has been tampered with or the archive has
        suffered data corruption, ARJ will display a message stating that
        the security envelope has been damaged.  In addition, ARJ will
        abort processing the archive.  The ARJ "-he" option and the ARJSFX
        "-s" option will skip the envelope verification.  The most likely
        causes of an invalid envelope are that the file was corrupted in
        transmission or that the archive was tampered with.

        You may ARJ-PROTECT an ARJ-SECURED archive, but ARJ will not set 
        the AUTO ARJ-PROTECT flag within the archive because of the
        ARJ-SECURITY.


     KNOWN ARJ ISSUES/PROBLEMS:

        Apparently ARJ.EXE and LHA.EXE (possibly other archivers) will NOT
        function properly in a WINDOWS DOS box while the REMOVEIT Smart
        Custodian (July 7, 1995, Vertisoft) is running.  

        The -hm! option may not work in a WINDOWS DOS box while the XMS
        accelerator option of Hurricane 2.0 is enabled.

        Under MS-DOS 4.01, ARJ may not extract LARGE (greater than 32MB)
        files from multiple volume archives properly.  The "dir" reported
        size may be incorrect.  A simple "CHKDSK /f" will correct the size.
        This problem is due to a BUG in MS-DOS 4.01.  Microsoft Corp. has
        fixes available for several DOS 4.01 bugs including this one.

        Due to the inner workings of the Turbo C++ runtime library, ARJ 
        may run out of memory if your computer is configured with 
        thousands of bytes of environment variables.

        The "-vs" option of ARJ may not function properly when ARJ is
        trying to archive several thousands of files.  This is due to a
        lack of free memory to execute any external commands.  The use of
        the "-hm" option will free up memory.

        When using a working directory, ARJ does not check for disk space
        before overwriting the original archive.  Be sure you have enough
        space before updating an archive using the "-w" switch.

        Because of a bug with extended archive header processing, you
        should convert to ARJ 2.10 and above as soon as practical.  This
        bug is NOT a current problem because no version of ARJ supports the
        use of the extended header.

        If you have garbled (-g) ARJ archives that were created by ARJ 2.21
        and the garbled files were stored (-m0) by ARJ, you may need to
        refer to ARJ 2.30 to extract those files without getting a CRC
        error.

        TSRs that activate via HOT KEYS may be inhibited by ARJ during user
        keyboard input.  This is a "feature" of the Turbo C++ getc()
        function.  A partial workaround is to use the ARJ "-jyry" option to
        go to single key query mode.

        A similar problem occurs with HYPERDISK and staged writes.
        HYPERDISK's timer delay appears to be inhibited during ARJ user
        keyboard input such as during "Ok to .... volume/diskette?".  This
        causes an error when you swap to the next diskette.  The workaround
        is to use the ARJ "-jyry" option to go to single key query mode.

        There is a reported problem using ARJ and floppy disk drives when
        using the disk cache program SUPER PCKWIK 3.30 with advanced
        diskette support (/D+).  The system may occasionally hang when ARJ
        attempts to read/write the diskette.  You may also get CRC or Bad
        file data errors.  Disabling the SUPER PCKWIK option with /D-
        appears to remove this problem.  Other programs have similar
        problems with this feature of SUPER PCKWIK.


     ARJ ERROR MESSAGES:

        See the document ERRORS.TXT.


     COMMONLY ASKED QUESTIONS:

        1) I have forgotten my password to an important garbled ARJ
        archive.  Is there an easy way to recover my lost files?

        ANSWER:  Sorry.  Generally speaking, there is no easy way.  There
        is brute force trial and error.  ARJ does not have any publicly
        known or secret backdoor access to passwords.  The password is not
        stored in the archive in any form nor is any hint stored.

        2) During extraction, ARJ aborts with a "Bad header" or "Bad file
        data" error message.  How do I recover my files?

        ANSWER:  Using the -jr option of ARJ, you should be able to recover
        the uncorrupted files in the archive.  The corrupted files are
        unrecoverable.  As a preventative, you can use the -hk option to
        build an error correction recovery file that will allow you to
        correct minor data corruption problems.

        3) How do I backup a directory and its subdirectories and files to
        multiple diskettes?

        ANSWER:  You should use a command as follows:
        ARJ a a:archive c:\dir\*.* -va -r -a1
        The -va option assumes that you are using formatted blank
        diskettes.  The -r option sets ARJ to recurse subdirectories. The
        -a1 option sets ARJ to store empty directories.

        4) Do I have to register ARJ if I use it at home for my personal
        computer activities (BBSing, backup, sharing files)?

        ANSWER:  No, you do not have to register ARJ for such activities.
        Instead, please share ARJ with a friend as a way of showing your
        appreciation.

        5) Can I distribute ARJ self-extracting archives or ARJ.EXE without
        a license?

        ANSWER:  You may share these files with others for personal use.
        However, you cannot distribute self-extracting files publicly
        without a license.  You cannot distribute ARJ.EXE to install
        software without a license.  The UNARJ.EXE program is freely
        available to install software.

        6) Can I distribute ARJ archives freely?

        ANSWER:  Any ARJ archives (not self-extracting) can be distributed
        freely.  Commercial users must have a registered ARJ to make the
        ARJ archives.

        7) ARJ displayed an error message indicating it ran out of memory
        backing up my disk with 20,000 files on it.  How can I proceed?

        ANSWER:  You should specify the -hm option to set ARJ to use disk
        space to handle all of the filenames.  ARJ automatically uses
        this option.

        8) I am trying to extract a multiple volume archive.  How do I get
        ARJ to prompt for the second diskette?

        ANSWER:  You need to specify the -v option to set ARJ to prompt for
        subsequent diskettes.

        9) How do I extract an ARJ archive recovering the original
        pathnames?

        ANSWER:  Use the "x" command as in "ARJ x archive".

        10) How do I create a self-extracting archive?

        ANSWER:  Use the -je or -je1 options as in "ARJ a archive *.* -je".

        11) How do I save empty directories in an archive?

        ANSWER:  Use the -a1 or -hb option along with -r.

        12) Can I include ARJ.EXE in my CD-ROM collection of unregistered
        shareware/freeware?

        ANSWER:  Any person or publisher may freely use and/or include
        ARJ.EXE in a CD-ROM collection of unregistered shareware/freeware
        provided the full shareware version of ARJ is included on the
        CD-ROM.

        13) How do I extract an ARJ archive created under Windows 9x to
        a DOS only PC or to a Windows NT/2000 PC?

        ANSWER:  You have two options.  The easiest is to use the "-hf2"
        option to force ARJ to attempt to restore the long filenames that
        are in the Win9x ARJ archive.  ARJ will try to use DOS to create
        the appropriate filenames.  DOS only allows the standard 8.3 name
        format.  Example:  ARJ x archive -hf2

        The other option uses the "-hf1" option and the "-ji" option. The
        "-hf1" option sets ARJ to extract files as "W95LNAME.000" names
        with the file extension indicating the sequence number.  The "-ji"
        option is used to create a log file with the "W95LNAME.000" names
        and their equivalent long filenames.  This log file can be edited
        into a batch file that can be used to recreate the original names.
        Example:  ARJ x archive -hf1 -jiNAME.LOG

        14) How do I extract files to the directory C:\Program Files?

        ANSWER:  When specifying filenames with embedded blanks, they 
        should be quoted.  If the last symbol before the last double quote 
        mark is a backslash, a space must be inserted before the double 
        quote. You may alternatively use the "-ht" option.

        Example:  ARJ x archive "C:\Program Files"    or
                  ARJ x archive "C:\Program Files\ "  or
                  ARJ x archive "-htC:\Program Files" 

        15) Can I specify a volume size other than 360K, 720K, 1200K, or
        1440K?

        ANSWER:  Yes, you can by specifying the exact byte size.  You can
        use "K" and "M" as modifiers.

        Examples:  ARJ a f:archive -v100000000 c:\*.* -r
                   ARJ a f:archive -v100M c:\*.* -r
                   ARJ a f:archive -v100000K c:\*.* -r

        16) How do I update diskette volume archives?  I get disk space
        error messages.

        ANSWER: When updating volume archives on diskettes, you need to
        specify a work directory to have enough work space.

        Example:  ARJ u a:archive -v1440 -wc:\temp c:\dir\*.*



     ARJ TECHNICAL SUPPORT:

        We have received many useful suggestions from users all over the
        world.  Many of those suggestions are in this version or will be
        incorporated in later versions of ARJ.

        We will try to resolve software problems with ARJ as they are made
        known to us.  Please notify us of any ARJ problems by mail, email,
        fax, or via the ARJ support BBSes mentioned below.  We will strive
        to keep ARJ a robust, stable and useful product.

        We will try to support unregistered users during their evaluation
        period, but please read the ARJ documentation first or visit our
        website.  Registered users will be eligible to receive technical 
        support by mail, telephone, fax, or electronic mail.

        Please try to limit requests for ARJ COMMAND HELP.  Refer to the
        ARJ documentation FIRST.  The time we spend answering simple
        questions is time we cannot use to IMPROVE ARJ.

        ***************************************************************
        DO NOT ASK FOR TECHNICAL SUPPORT IN THE CASE OF LOST PASSWORDS!
        ***************************************************************


     ARJ AVAILABILITY:

        The latest version of ARJ/ARJ32 can be obtained from the following
        sources:

        ARJ HOME PAGE:  http://WWW.ARJSOFTWARE.COM

        ARJ SUPPORT BBSes:  See ARJ_BBS.TXT

        ARJ is available from a number of other BBSes, but we can only vouch
        for the integrity of the archive if the ARJ###.EXE verifies its
        ARJ-SECURITY envelope as valid.  If no security envelope exists,
        then the data has been re-archived and there is no assurance of
        data integrity.

        If none of the above sources are suitable, you may order a copy of
        the latest version of ARJ directly from the author.  Send a check
        or money order for five dollars (US) to cover the costs of shipping
        and handling.  Please specify diskette size (3.5 or 5.25 inch);
        otherwise, a 3.5 inch diskette will be shipped.  Please allow a few
        weeks for delivery, longer for foreign deliveries.

        Our address is at the end of this document.


     ARJ INTERNET MAILING LIST

        New information announcements about ARJ is now available via an
        Internet mailing list. You can subscribe (and unsubscribe) by
        sending an email message to:

        majordomo@Dunkel.de

        and writing in THE BODY of the message (NOT in the subject):

        subscribe arj-info

        You'll be sent a message stating that you were included in the
        mailing list together with information on how to unsubscribe. If
        you just state "help" (without the quotes) in the message, you'll
        get more information on the available commands.


     ARJ WEB SUPPORT

        ARJ on WWW!  You can reach ARJ support information at:

        http://www.ARJSOFTWARE.com                    (ARJ homepage)

        http://www.Dunkel.de/ARJ                      (German and English)
        http://www.tsf.be                             (French and English)


     SDN EXTENSION FILES

        SDN International(sm) is a FidoNet hobby organization which makes
        available for distribution author-direct shareware files to FidoNet
        capable bulletin board systems world wide.  ARJ has been chosen by
        SDN sysops' consensus as its official compression utility.

        Program files distributed via SDN have a copyright ".SDN"
        extension.  Files distributed by SDN after February 1993 can be
        decompressed by ARJ.  Files dated earlier can be decompressed if
        the compression utility SDN previously used is on PATH.

        SDN files are security sealed with their own exclusive security
        seal, FSecure, created by Pacesoft.  This security may be verified
        using the FileTest utility available at the SDN Project AuthorLine
        BBS 203-634-0370 or at most SDN participating BBS sites.

        Shareware authors wishing to distribute shareware by release
        through SDN may contact the same SDN Project AuthorLine BBS.


     DISTRIBUTORS:

        A list of authorized ARJ agent/distributors are found in the
        file AGENTS.TXT.  They provide local registration and technical
        support for ARJ.  Other distributors only provide the evaluation
        version of ARJ.


     ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS:

        LHARC is the name of an archiver by Haruyasu Yoshizaki.
        PKZIP and ZIP are trademarks of PKWare, Inc.
        PAK is the trademark of NoGate Consulting.
        ARJ is the trademark of ARJ Software, Inc.

        We wish to express my gratitude to Haruyasu Yoshizaki (Yoshi) for
        developing LHARC and distributing its source code.  LHARC gave us
        the impetus to start studying data compression.  We also wish to
        thank Haruhiko Okumura for providing additional ideas.  His AR001
        and AR002 program provided the basic design for the early versions
        of ARJ.

        And my thanks also go to Paul Kocher who contributed the design of
        the new ARJ SECURITY envelope mechanism.
   
        We also wish to thank Fabrice BELLARD for LZEXE which is used to
        squish the ARJSFX, ARJSFXJR, and ARJSFXV modules.

        We also wish to credit the following authors for providing UPX 
        which was used to compress the ARJSFX32 module.

                    The Ultimate Packer for eXecutables
          Copyright (c) 1996-1999 Markus Oberhumer & Laszlo Molnar
               http://wildsau.idv.uni-linz.ac.at/mfx/upx.html
                          http://www.nexus.hu/upx

        UPX is a portable, extendable, high-performance executable packer 
        for several different executable formats.

        We wish to thank those who have contributed significantly to the
        development of ARJ.  Those include:

        Nico de Vries
        Frederic Taes
        Soeren Pingel Dalsgaard
        Axel Dunkel
        Jonathan Forbes
        Ron Freimuth
        Brian Godette
        Robb Hufalt
        Arkady Kleyner
        Michael Lawler
        Ken Levitt
        Eberhard Mattes
        Mike McCombs
        Alexander Pruss
        Joseph Teller
        Etienne Joarlette

        And to the many others who have helped, provided messages of
        support, or provided financial support, THANKS!!!  Because of
        you, we are able to provide FULL-TIME support to ARJ!

        I personally wish to thank my wife, Susan, and my son, Timothy, for
        putting up with this ARJ obsession.  Their encouragement and support
        have been invaluable.

        Our greatest thanks goes to Almighty God for His inspiration and
        great salvation.  For apart from Him, ARJ could not have been done.
        John 15:5

        It is our prayer that this product not be used in any way to
        infringe or attack our freedom to worship.


     USAGE AND DISTRIBUTION POLICY:

        See LICENSE.TXT file for license policy.


     BRIEF BIOGRAPHY OF THE AUTHOR OF ARJ:

        Robert Jung grew up in Catonsville and Baltimore, Maryland.  He
        graduated from the University of Maryland in 1970.  After a short
        stint in the U.S. Army, he taught chemistry for six years.  From
        teaching he entered the computer programming profession where he
        was employed as a programmer analyst, a network analyst, and a
        software engineer.  In late 1990, he developed the ARJ archive
        format and program to meet a personal need in archiving.  In
        February of 1991, he released ARJ 1.00 as a shareware product.
        The author currently supports ARJ full-time and resides in Norwood,
        Massachusetts with his wife Susan, and son Timothy.


     FINAL COMMENTS:

        We do hope that you find this program as useful as we have.  We
        would appreciate any suggestions to improve this archiver.

        You can reach us at:

        Email address:  robjung@world.std.com

        Web site:       http://www.ARJSOFTWARE.com

        Fax number:     781-769-4893


        ARJ Software, Inc.
        P.O. Box 249
        Norwood MA 02062
        USA


      end of document

